we've not spoken for 2 years but I have
to say you look remarkably different so
I lost three stone in a year and there's
secret to that statement Johan Hari the
bestselling author who's using his own
body to unearth the extraordinary
benefits and disturbing risks of the new
weight loss drugs OIC it is literally
the hottest drug in the country right
now I really worry about the risk of
these drugs you're nine times more
likely to get this particular condition
which is excruciatingly pain for and
these drugs are working very hard on key
parts of your brain in fact there are 12
significant risks and we'll get into
that but it seems extraordinary that we'
reached the point where we would inject
ourselves with a potentially risky drug
to stop us from eating and we've had 40
Years of relentlessly promoting diet and
exercise as the only solutions and only
10% of people really do lose huge
amounts of weight on diets and keep it
off but now we have the most effective
tool for self- starvation human beings
have ever come up with when I started
taking zpic I was literally 80% % less
hungry than I normally am these drugs
really do massively reduce or reverse
obesity and a few years from now we'll
have 50% of the population taking it the
new miracle drug now this is when I go
through the 12 big risks some of which
have not really been explained to the
public So within a year of stopping you
regain 70% of the weight you've lost
muscle mass loss is a real problem
there's concern that it may be causing
suicidal feelings and then there's one
of the really big risks and it's
absolutely Grim beyond belief and that
is
congratulations Dio gang we've made some
progress 63% of you that listen to this
podcast regularly don't subscribe which
is down from
69% our goal is 50% so if you've ever
liked any of the videos we've posted if
you like this channel can you do me a
quick favor and hit the Subscribe button
it helps this channel more than you know
and the bigger the channel gets as
you've seen the bigger the guest get
thank you and enjoy this
[Music]
episode Yan we've not spoken for 2
years but I have to say you look
remarkably different there's a secret to
that Stephen really we can dig into yeah
what is the
secret so for me it started it's a kind
of weird story it started in the winter
of 2020 so it was that weird period when
kind of the world was opening up again
after the
pandemic and i' gained a lot of weight
in lockdown like loads of people
and because of that kind of weird moment
of reopening I went to a party for the
first time in like I don't know a year
and a half two years and it was a party
thrown by a kind of famous Hollywood
actor and on the way there I remember
thinking oh this is going to be kind of
funny because all these Hollywood people
are going to put on weight as well right
they're going to have gained weight what
are they going to look like so I
remember getting there looking around
and having this really weird feeling
because it's not just they hadn't gained
weight everyone was gaunt right like
everyone looked like their own Snapchat
filter like they had like higher
cheekbones they looked cleaner and
clearer and
sharper and I was kind of wandering
around feeling bit like oh [__] and I
bumped into a friend of mine on the
dance floor and I said to her what it
looks like um looks like everyone really
did do Pates during
lockdown and she laughed and then she
looked at me and I S looked at her and
she said well you know it wasn't Pilates
right and I sort of looked at her
blankly and she pulled out her phone and
she showed she Googled an image and she
showed me an OIC pen and I didn't know
what it was and I said what are you
talking about and said it's a drug
everyone here is on this drug right not
just the Stars like their wives their
agents their agents kids everyone right
and I've been really thrown and then
over the next few days I I read a lot
about these these new weight loss drugs
and I've never I don't remember ever
coming across a topic where I felt so
deeply conflicted from the very
beginning and that conflict remained all
the way through right the subtitle to my
book is the extraordinary benefits and
disturbing risks of the new weight loss
drugs and that's even right from the
start I was I was aware that was that
was the the tension so the benefits are
kind of obvious right you know I'm older
than my grandfather ever got to be
because he died of a heart attack loads
of the men in my family get really fat
and die of heart attacks my uncle died
of a heart attack my dad had a lot of
heart problem problems um there's a lot
of evidence that obesity unfortunately
does cause a whole range of health
problems over 20000 diseases and
complications uh there's a lot of
evidence these drugs really do massively
reduce or reverse obesity the average
person who uses them as z p wovi loses
15% of their body weight in a year with
the new generation of the drugs the next
ones that are coming down the line the
average person loses 24% of their body
weight it's staggering it's just below
barrier atric surgery so I could see the
obvious health benefit and I could see
that the Alternatives that most of us
have been pursuing diets have not worked
well for most
people but at the same time I thought I
mean just I had so many doubts straight
away I thought well we've seen this
story before there have been lots of
miracle diet drugs that have been
announced they caus dramatic weight loss
at first and we always discover some
horrendous side effect that causes you
know cat Ric outcomes that mean the
whole thing has to be pulled I thought
that I
thought well we know what causes obesity
right the reason obesity is massively
increased is because of a complete
change in the food supply we eat
completely different food to what our
grandparents ate we need to deal with
that not kind of drug everyone I also
thought well what will happen to people
with eating disorders when they get a
hold of this what will this do to the
kind of positive changes that were
happening in accepting a kind of broader
range of Weights so I was
really deeply conflicted so to really
get to the bottom of this for my book
magic pill I I spent a year taking the
drugs and going on this big Journey all
over the world from rekovic in Iceland
to Minneapolis to Tokyo to interview the
leading experts in the world on these
drugs the biggest supporters the biggest
critics all sorts of uh kind of alleys
and avenues that follow from them and at
the end of it it's really weird I know
far more than I did before I know far
more about benefits and risks and far
more about what this is going to do to
the culture and it will be
massive but I'm still really
conflicted so if we if we start there
then you're at the party someone
mentions this zmek thing to you can have
you got the zmek um pen on you I have it
as a a prop you've got it here okay so
it's very simple um you it's just a
little pen it's like um an epip pen so
you take that you uh put on the little
lid I won't take it out because I need
this one later but the um although this
one's empty you put a little you twist a
little needle onto there and you inject
yourself with it and you inject yourself
once a week and it's really strange the
effect it has I remember the first day I
took the
injection couple of days later I
remember waking
up and I was lying in bed and I had this
weird feeling you know feeling when you
wake up and you're not quite with it and
you think what am I feeling and I was
struggling to articulate it and I I was
I thought I felt mly nauseous which
everyone gets when they start taking but
that wasn't the thing that was puzzling
me and then I
realized I'd woken up and I wasn't
hungry I don't remember that ever
happening to me before I mean don't mean
that as an exaggeration I I used to be
woken up every day like really hungry
often I would be woken up by hunger by
my stomach rumbling and I went on my
kind of typical routine for the day I
went to this Cafe just around the corner
from where I live and I ordered the same
thing I would always order which was a
kind of big kind of a Brown roll with
lots of chicken and mayo in it and I had
like three mouthfuls and I was full I
just didn't want to eat
anymore I remember leaving I remember
Tatiana the woman who works in the cafe
kind of shouting after me to see if I
was Ill or
something and then for lunch I went to
the same place I always go or went at
the time next to my office there's a
Turkish kind of restaurant I went there
I ordered a Mediterranean lamb again I
had like three or four mouthfuls I
wasn't hungry it was like the kind of
had come down on my appetite I was
literally 80% less hungry than I
normally am and it basically stayed that
way from then on it was a very uh
physically and psychologically strange
experience so on the on the on the pen
itself cuz I just want to make sure I
fully understand this is that that
little pen you have in your hand for
people that can't aren't watching on
video there's a it kind of looks like a
big sharpie yeah exactly and is that one
dose yeah there's load of doses in there
so you twist the base yeah and
um that each time you twist it it would
release with this pen 1 milligram okay
yeah and how many twists you get out of
one pen uh I think each one contains
four dozes yeah and how much does that
cost so it varies massively because as
you know I live half in the US half in
Britain a lot of the time um so in
Britain this cost you at the moment
about £250 a month in the US it's way
more like $800 a month so £250 a month
how many sort of doses do I get for that
£250 you that would cover your whole
month so each month you'd have to pay
£250 you get four doses in each one and
you said in the US it's way more way
more how much more so it's about $800
between 800 and 1,200 bearing in mind
there' have been lots of shortages which
I'm sure we'll talk about so the price
has kind of been a bit sensitive to how
much is actually available at any given
time okay interesting and are these
drugs
new relatively so I interviewed the
scientists who played the key role in
the breakthroughs that led to the
development of the drugs and then
scientists who worked on it at every
stage
so in one sense they're not that new
diabetics have been using them on
license now for 18 years so for obesity
they're relatively new for diabetes
they've been around for nearly 20 years
and it was fascinating talking to the
scientists involved because one of the
things that's really weird about this is
there's a huge debate about how they
even work so there's certain things that
we know for sure so if you now ate
something right you it don't matter what
it is after a while a hormone would
start to be produced it in your body
called
glp1 and that is one of many gut
hormones that would start to be created
and it's basically glp1 is a natural
signal saying Stephen you've had enough
stop eating right just stop now right
but gp1 natural glp1 only remains in
your system for a couple of minutes and
then it's washed away so if you sort of
push through it you can carry on eating
right most people do stop when they get
the signal um so what these drugs do is
they simulate glp1 they inject into you
an artificial copy of glp 1 but instead
of that glp1 remaining in your system
for a few minutes and then disappearing
it stays in your system for a whole week
so when I go to that cafe and I eat the
thing I'd normally eat my system is
filled with signals that say you're
already full Johan you don't need
anymore right so that was initially that
is definitely a key part of how it works
and it was initially thought that these
drugs worked on your gut right these gp1
is a hormone that's made in the gut um
it's thought that the effect was it
slows down your gut it slows down
gastric emptying that is definitely
happening but The Cutting Edge science
and the kind of leading neuroscientists
that I interviewed now believe actually
it primarily has an effect on your brain
it changes what you want and how you
want it which brings with it a huge
parallel set of both benefits and risks
interesting so it's once a week and you
basically feel Fuller for a whole week
from one injection yeah not everyone
gets to that state immediately some
people it takes longer some people the
side effects are just intolerable and
they can't take it at all or they can't
continue to take it and I interviewed
plenty of people who were in that
position but for most
people the best way I can describe it is
imagine you just had Christmas dinner
yeah and I came up to you so you're
completely bloated you're lying on the
sofa and I came up to you and said hey
Steven I got you a Big Mac here it is
and you be like I mean you could
physically force yourself to eat that
Big Mac you might throw up but you
probably could eat it but you just don't
want to you feel full so it creates a
very rapid sense of fullness in response
to far so I used to eat 3,200 calories a
day roughly I now eat about
1,800 there a huge drop and the benefits
are kind of obvious of that but there
are really big costs I discovered
there's in fact 12 really big risks and
there's all sorts of Cu at first when
you hear all this you're like well this
is just kaching win win right who
wouldn't want this but there's a lot of
risks and downsides as well so I want to
get on to all those risks and downsides
but one of the I think rebuttal that
some people would have when they hear
this um is kind of contrary to the
reaction I think you expect which is
Johan I really love eating food I really
really enjoy the process of eating food
aren't you losing happiness because food
gives a lot of people happiness in
various ways so aren't you a little bit
annoyed now that you've lost your desire
to have you know that role that you used
to have for breakfast in the morning
hasn't that taken something from you
this is a big drawback for lots of
people I think I'm quite unusual so I'll
explain how most people feel about this
then I'll explain how I feel about it um
you're absolutely right even yenil Holst
who was one of the scientists who
developed o zenic said look for most
people it's just a life without pleasure
in food is just unbearable and after a
couple of years they just give up
because they want to enjoy life right
and one of the key things that gives us
pleasure throughout the day is eating uh
and a lot of people feel that way if you
look at for example Jay Raina a
brilliant food critic here in Britain
you know he just described how he
started taking it he would go to the
best restaurants in Paris places he
loves and he
just couldn't get any pleasure out of it
so for him it was just awful it's a very
common complaint that it drains pleasure
from
food honestly I I had almost the
opposite experience but I want to stress
I do think I'm quite unusual so I
realized when I started taking these
drugs one of the fascinating things
about these drugs is they will bring to
the surface whatever psychological
issues you had with food right because
it so radically interrupts your eating
patterns um and that can be very
challenging for a lot of people I'm sure
we'll get into that but for me I
realized how much of my eating from when
I was very
young the pleasure I got from food was
not primarily from like tasting it and
savoring it the pleasure I got from food
was mostly from kind of a feeling of
stuffing myself so stuffing is like you
you do it at Christmas din we all do it
sometimes stuffing is when you sort of
eat deliberately beyond the point at
which you're full and you feel it as a
physical sensation you can feel it sort
of pushing up on your esophagus and out
on your stomach and I think from when I
was very young I grew up in a very
violent and crazy environment I think
one of the ways I learned to cope with
that there are many productive and
positive ways I learn to cope with that
but one of the kind of downsides is I
learned to really eat to soothe myself
and I would stuff and when I started
taking o zenic I actually couldn't eat
like that anymore you you can't stuff
yourself I would literally throw up if I
you know tried to stuff myself so
actually for me it massively slowed down
my eating and I actually enjoy food a
fair bit more now I don't want to
overstate it I'm not a foodie I'm never
going to be that person but like I
remember going for dinner with one of my
friends I know maybe three or four
months after I started taking it and I
saying to me you know it's always been a
bit stressful to eat with you because
you eat so quickly but you don't seem to
really enjoy it and now you do actually
look like you're enjoying your
food but I stress again I don't think
I'm typical in that respect there are
far more people like J Raina than there
are like me I really want to go
into why people you know people's
relationship with food more generally um
but I wanted to close off on that what
you were saying about a Zex impact on
the brain you talked about gp1 in the
gut and the you know the impact that
hasn't making you feel satiated but you
also alluded to there's now research
that suggests it's doing something to
the brain as well this is totally
fascinating it opens up a whole new set
of potential benefits for these drugs in
relation to add
and a whole set of potential risks for
these drugs in relation to depression so
I want to stress there is very big
scientific disagreement about what is
happening in the brain in relation to
these drugs and it's a bit like when you
interview people it's like it's like
looking at a picture that's just coming
into shape so a year from now we'll know
much more than we do now but what was
discovered this actually discovered in
the 90s um here in London at Hammer
Smith hospital was that in fact we don't
only have glp receptors in our guts we
have glp receptors in our brains in fact
glp one can be made in the brain right
which is fascinating it could also made
in your thyroid which is very
significant I'm sure we'll come back to
um so when you take these drugs um as
John Wilding one of the key figures in
the development of these drugs said to
me you can tag the drug which means that
you can sort of D it and you can give it
to animals and then cut open their
brains obviously you can't do that with
humans and when you do that when you
just give them the drug and you in their
brain afterwards what you find is this
drug goes everywhere in the brain it's
going all over the brain it is primarily
having a brain effect right and it
definitely also much more anecdotally
feels that way when you take it it feels
like you want different things right it
doesn't just feel like a physical
sensation of I'm full it feels I
remember taking my godsons to McDonald's
maybe a week after I started taking it
and I didn't want a McDonald's and then
one of my godsons saying to me who are
you and what have you done with Yan
right was so contrary to my preferences
and my fact um one of my low points in
life was Christmas Eve
2009 I went to my local branch of KFC
just around the corner from where we are
now cuz I used to live in here and I
said to the guy behind the counter my
standard order which is so gross I won't
repeat it and the guy behind the counter
said oh yoan I'm really glad you're here
wait a minute I was like all right and
he went off behind where they fry the
chicken and everything and he came back
with a massive Christmas card and
everyone was working that day and they'd
written to our best customer and they
all clapped me and one of the things
that was so terrible is I thought this
isn't even the Fried Chicken shop I come
to the most right how can this be
happening to me but so when you speak to
the The Cutting Edge neuroscientists and
I interviewed them in great depth
there's basically three theories about
what these drugs are doing to your brain
right very broadly I mean they this is a
quite crude way of putting it um so one
is you have in your brain something
called the reward system the reward
system is what motivates you to do
anything so you know you have sex you
eat you meet up with a friend your
reward centers hum right it's what makes
you feel good when you do something
pleasurable and one theory about these
drugs is they dampen your reward system
so the reason I don't want a Big Mac is
that a Big Mac is not as rewarding to me
as it would have been before I took
these drugs right that obviously brings
with it a set of risks because then you
go okay if it's dampening my reward
system for Big Mac is it dampening my
reward system for the things I love
writing reading there's a big debate
about this there's concern that in some
people it may be causing suicidal
feelings and in some people it may be
causing depression there is a warning on
the drug to that effect required by the
FDA the the fin drug agency in the
United States that's one concern but
there are other scientists who say that
we don't that that's not correct that um
that the suicide risk is not accurate
and that they don't work by dampening a
reward system some people like aelia G
who's at the University of um Alabama in
Birmingham said to me what he thinks
that it does is it resets your
preferences it's almost like taking your
phone back to the factory settings it
resets key elements of the kind of food
you want to a healthier level can I just
say on that sorry to interrupt but um I
was thinking constantly as you were
talking about your trip to McDonald's
and not wanting the McDonald's anymore I
I've come to see in my life that if I
have something unhealthy if I have sugar
or a cookie today I'm I feel like I'm
much more compelled to have another one
tomorrow I feel like I I I look back on
certain periods of my life where I
almost get into a bit of a sugar spiral
and it could be because of stress or
some other Factor but it made me think
that the sugar itself is somewhat
addicting so when you were talking I was
thinking is it is it not just a case
that you're consuming less sugar and you
know some of these addictive food
substances so you want it less the next
day if you know what I'm saying yeah
there's an experiment that proves you're
right but in a complicated way um can I
just finish off one thing about the
brain and then come back to that raised
a super important and and truthful point
the third theory about how it could be
working in the brain and this comes from
a scientist called Professor Paul Kenny
who actually did the experiment relates
to what you just said he argues that in
your brain you don't just have a reward
system you have something called the
satiety system and this is a crucial
concept for people who want to
understand these drugs and what's gone
wrong with our diets more generally to
understand satiety is just the feeling
of having had enough right we've all had
the feeling of being sated you're like
okay I'm done I don't want anymore we
get that with food sex all sorts of
things right you're just sated um he
argues that in your brain there there's
basically alongside the reward system
there's also a satiety system A system
that just says Stephen you've had enough
stop now and he argues that what these
drugs do is they dial up your satiety
system they don't dial down your reward
system right there's a huge and ongoing
debate about that what we do know is
they're having some really significant
effect on the brain and that has all
sorts of implications that we need to
think about when I was learning about
this
I remember
thinking this is a much more intimate
and risky transformation than when you
first hear oh I'm taking something that
affects my stomach right so there's a
lot there about the brain and
implications for addiction as well which
we can talk about but to come to the
thing you asked about which is so
important of all the things I learned
there was an experiment that kind of
freaked me out about this um because
obious I was trying to figure out well
how did we get to this point because at
first glance I can see how it seems
crazy in a way it did to me you know we
gained an enormous amount of weight in
the last 40 years I was born in 1979 the
year I was born 6% of British people
were obese it's now 26% right staggering
increase unprecedented in human history
and it seems extraordinary that we've
reached the point where we would inject
ourselves with a potentially risky drug
to stop us from eating it seems so
unnatural and so wrong and I was trying
well how did we get here right what
happened
which is why satiety is so important so
it's this experiment that I think helps
to understand that thing you were saying
about sugar it's done by this guy
Professor Paul Kenny who's the head of
neuroscience at Mount siai in New York
and a brilliant
neuroscientist so Paul grew up in Dublin
and he moved to the US when he was in
his 20s to do his PhD I think and he
moved to San Diego first and it quickly
clocked Americans do not eat like Irish
people right they eat much more sugar
much more fat they eat just much more
right and within being within like a
year of being there he'd gained I think
a stone and a half or something uh so he
gained I think it was 23 pound so it
gained a lot of weight and he started to
wonder sort of like the question you
were asking does this food when you
consume it change your brain in ways
that compel you to consume it more
what's going on so he designed an
experiment that sort of investigated
this uh which I've nicknamed cheesecake
park that's not its official name right
um you get a load of rats and you raise
them in a cage and they've just got the
kind of food that rats evolved to eat
over thousands of years it's pellets
based on their natural diet and if you
do that even though they've got far more
pellets than they could actually eat
they will eat enough to deal with their
hunger and then they just naturally stop
right so when they've got the kind of
food they evolve to have they never
become overweight or obese they just
stabilize their weight they've got a
kind of natural nutritional wisdom then
Professor Kenny introduced the American
diet to them
he fried up some bacon he bought some
Snickers bars and crucially he gives
them a load of cheesecake and they come
along and they nibble the cheesecake and
the other stuff and quite quickly they
just go wild for it they shun the food
they evolved to have and they just start
obsessively eating the cheesecake the
fried the fried bacon the Snickers bars
he described to me how they would like
he would put the cheesecake in and they
would just hurl themselves into the
cheesecake and then like eat their way
out and emerge like completely slicked
with the cheesecake so given this kind
of food all their nutritional wisdom
disappeared just went away and they
became obsessed with this new kind of
food um and as he put it to me within a
couple of days they were different
animals their all their health
indicators were worse they were
obsessively eating within a few weeks
they were their health was really bad
they became extremely obese and then he
varied the experiment even more in a way
it seemed to me as a former junk food
addict a little bit cruel he took all
the American diet away and they just
have the food they evolved to have the
food they used to eat right and he was
quite sure he knew what would happen
that they would eat a lot more of the
kind of natural food than they had
before and this would prove that junk
food expands your appetites that isn't
what happened what happened was much
worse they completely shunned the
natural food it was like they no longer
recognized it as food at all they just
refused to eat it they starved and it
was only when they were really starving
that they went back to eating the
natural food there's lots of human
examples of but there's something as
Professor Gerald M who's a nutritionist
at Harvard said to me there's something
about the food we're eating which I
think you're getting out in that
question which is undermining our
ability to know when to stop which is
how we got to the point where we so many
people 47% of Americans want to take a
drug that will make them stop I was
reading about this um thing you call the
Cheesecake Park in your book in Chapter
2 and the other sort of Step he took the
experiment to was the whole idea of
electrocuting the animals when they ate
certain foods and you say in the book
that he then um would electrocute the
animals while shining a yellow light in
their eyes so that they would eventually
become scared of this yellow light and
in the case of um the natural food when
he Shone the yellow light in their eyes
they would run away but even if you
Shone the yellow light in their eyes
while they were eating the junk food
they would stay and continue to eat the
cheesecake which kind of the conclusion
in Chapter 2 of your book as I've
written it here is and the thing this
came from the researcher if you're
exposed um to this food for a while Paul
concluded the desire for it is so great
that you will ignore all sorts of
negative consequences to eat it as we
know as I know in my own life right my
KFC Obsession had obvious negative
consequences in my life and the reason
this is so important in relation to
these drugs so for a long time I was
looking at two things right I was
looking at why did we so many of us gain
so much weight so rapidly obesity has
trebled globally in my lifetime right
completely unprecedented human history
why did that happen
and how do these drugs work and at first
I thought they were like parallel lines
right but actually I realized they were
like kind of braided plats the answer is
completely densely interconnected what
we know is the kind of food we eat
profoundly undermines our sense of
satiety it completely disrupts just like
it did with the rats it we don't get
that signal you're full you've had
enough stop from the kind of food we're
eating and what these drugs do is they
res restore a sense of satiety Carell
Laro another one of the key scientists
who develop these drugs said to me what
these what these drugs give you is
satiety hormones they give you back a
sense of being full and in a way at
first I thought well that makes the
whole thing seem crazy right because
there's a guy called Michael low
brilliant Professor um at Drexel
University in Philly he said to me look
you got to understand these drugs are an
artificial solution to an artificial
problem we've artificially created this
problem through a catastrophic food
system that is screwing bring us up from
childhood and then Along come these
drugs as the artificial solution to that
and the first thing you think is right
we' got to deal with the fear system
right and that is absolutely true and
correct and I remember going to one of
my closest friends um I call her Judy in
the book it's not a real name who you
know she'd had cancer seven years before
so I've been with her all through that
kind of really grueling process and it
was an absolute nightmare she's a single
mom and you can imagine how how Grim
that was um and I said to her I feel
like a complete fraud taking these drugs
right I'm always talking about how we
need to deal with the causes of social
problems I can see very clearly the
cause of this problem and this is just
sort of dealing with the symptom and she
said to me look
Johan you can stop taking this drug
that's fine do it if you want to but
when I had cancer we know there is
something in the environment that is
triggering breast cancer in women right
one in seven women in now get breast
cancer that didn't happen in the past
it's not happening in Japan where it's
only one in 38 women something is really
wrong in Britain and the US in the way
we're living that is triggering breast
cancer right but she said to me you
didn't say to me when I got breast
cancer well [__] me all this
environmental problem has caused this
breast cancer and now you want to inject
yourself with another poison
chemotherapy in order to deal with it no
you said okay we've got an environmental
problem obviously that environmental
problem needs to be dealt with but
you've got to stay alive or you you
can't deal with it right the analogy she
gave me that really helped me was she
said if your house is on fire right you
could say well look we need to build
houses that aren't made of flammable
materials and we should make it the law
that you've got to have Sprinklers and
of course I agree but the first thing
you got to do is put out the fire in
your house right and I after that
conversation it was just after it I I
met a guy called Jeff Parker he's in San
Francisco he's a 66 year old lighting
designer who was about 16 Stone when I
when when he first started taking weight
loss drugs and he was in real trouble
heart problems liver problems kidney
problems it was very painful for him to
walk and he got mjo which is the next
Generation up of these weight loss drugs
and he lost loads of weight and all his
health problems reversed and now he
walks his dog over the Golden Gate
Bridge every day and is really happy and
said look I feel like now I'm going to
enjoy my retirement and I said to him
but Jeff I'm don't you feel like we
should be dealing with the environment
mental causes and he said absolutely I
totally agree with you you start that
campaign sign me up but I've got to tell
you by the time we achieve that I'm
going to be dead right we're not going
to get there in the next few years and I
want to live and I found
that I found it hard to
dispute what what if people say well you
know you could um you could just not
choose the role at the coffee shop in
the morning you could have just gone for
I don't know a salad or something yeah
it's a choice you're making Johan
make better choices so this was
completely the voice in my head I
remember another one of my friends when
I was at dinner and I was doing this I
was talking through everything I've been
learning and I was talking about you
know the r What You Got Away here I
thought was the risks of obesity which
are really disturbing when you learn
about them I was actually surprised we
all know obesity is not good for your
health but I was actually stunned when
you look at the evidence about how bad
obesity is view in relation to not just
diabetes but cancer dementia across the
board we can come back to that so I was
like well you got to weigh these risks
of obesity against the risks of these
drugs and I learned that there are 12
significant risks associated with these
drugs and he said what are you talking
about you haven't got to weigh those
risks at all there's a third option go
on a diet exercise right and he said
I've seen you do it you've done it
plenty of times right do that and of
course I had this voice in my head I
thought I was cheating um and I thought
well why don't I do why why am I not
doing that right um and I really began
to get an insight into this when I I
went to interview an amazing person
called Professor Tracy man who's in
Minneapolis where I met her um who's
done some of the most important research
on diet ever I remember actually I met
her I interviewed her in a place called
is bun which is um cinnamon bun shop
famous cinon bun shop in Minneapolis
when I arrived the guy on the door said
have you ever been here before and I
said no and he said I will give you a
free cinnamon bun then they gave me this
like 2,000 calorie massive cinnamon bun
that sat there the whole time we were
talking about diets and Professor man
she began to research this in the year
2000 and she wanted to figure out how
much do diets work right are they
effective and at that time the science
was very clear diets are really
effective if you go on a diet you will
lose weight right but she looking she's
looking at all these studies almost
24,000 studies and she noticed as part
of this big it's called a
metaanalysis and she discovered
something a bit weird which is most of
these studies the overwhelming majority
would follow people who were on a diet
for 3 months so you you exercise your
willpower you go on a diet for three
months you lose a load of weight and
then they just stopped and the
implication was you stay at that lower
rate forever she' be like I know quite a
lot of people who are not in that
position that doesn't happen to them so
she looked in more detail and discovered
there were 24 studies that had followed
diers not just over this short period
but for two years and in a handful of
cases five years and when you look at
the longer picture the picture is really
different after 2 years
the average person on a diet has lost 2
pounds in weight right so it's not
nothing but it's pretty close to nothing
right it's it's extraordinarily low so
what we know from the research on
dieting is there's a very small number
of people around 10% of people who
really do lose huge amounts of weight on
diets and keep it off we all know people
like that I've got someone in my family
like that right but for the vast
majority of people it doesn't work and I
remember saying to Professor man and
loads of other scientists who looked at
this well how can that be because we
know you only have to know the laws of
physics to know if you consume fewer
calories than you burn obviously you
will lose weight to dispute that you
have to dispute the laws of physics
right so how can it be that these people
are dieting but they're not losing
weight and BR man and other people
explained to me um something that's sort
of missing in this picture that I think
really helps us to understand it and is
actually important for understanding
these drugs I think so a lot of the
scientists explained that there are
biolog iCal changes that happen as you
gain weight which make it harder for you
to find your way back in a in a way that
you can sustain so in the 60s and 70s
there was this theory about weight that
was almost universally accepted it's
called set point Theory it sounds a bit
complex but it's pretty simple if you
think about your temperature your body
temperature right your body wants you to
be at the temperature you and me are at
right now right and if our temperature
goes higher than that if we get a fever
or if we go to the Sahara Desert our
body will work really hard involuntarily
to bring us down it'll make us sweat it
will make us really uncomfortable and
again if you're and also if your
temperature goes below the temperature
we're currently at your body will start
to shiver again it will make you really
crave heat right so your body has a set
level at which it keeps your temperature
and it works extremely hard to keep you
in that zone for your whole life and it
was thought for a long time that your
weight was a bit like that that when
you're born or possibly even in the womb
you have a biological set point for your
weight that That Remains the Same
throughout your life and you can go a
bit higher or a bit lower but basically
you're fixed there but then the Obesity
crisis happened starting in the late 70s
early 80s there's a huge weight rise in
such a large part of the population and
it looked like oh set point theory is
just wrong right that can't be correct
because if it was true then you couldn't
possibly have this but then Professor
low at Drexel and other places and other
people um discovered what what is really
happening in my view I think they
produced very compelling evidence for
this as you gain weight your body's set
point Rises right so let's say my body
wanted me to be 18% body fat as I get to
30% body fat my body will then fight
very hard to keep me at that higher
level right which seems really weird at
first why would that be so if you if you
let's say you gained three stone right
and then you tried to lose weight we
have think of a hypothetical Robert
dairo for the movie Raging Bull gained
you know three or four stone right and
then tried to cut back but what you'd
find was your metabolism would massively
slow down so it would you'd have to burn
far more to get the same number of
calories as you do now uh you would
crave far more sweet and salty foods you
would have lower energy so you would
find it harder to exercise so your set
point has risen and it's trying to keep
you there and I remember saying to loads
of scientists well that just seems
bizarre why would Evolution endow us
with that that's such a maladaptation
right why would why would um
why would it be and they explained to me
well you have to think about the
circumstances where we evolved in the
circumstances where humans evolved in
fact every human circumstance pretty
much until like 100 years ago there was
never a situation where you would have
completely abundant calories in fact
hyper abundant calories for your whole
life you'd have far more calories around
you than you could ever possibly eat
that never happened so your body didn't
Evolution didn't prepare us with good
instincts for that what you did have
what was a big risk was famine
right there was a big risk that at some
point in your life food would run out
and you would be in real trouble and in
a famine the fattest person at the start
is going to be the last man standing
right Timothy shalomay will die in week
one of a famine and you know John Candy
will still be alive at the end of it Al
not a great example because John Candy
has died but you get the point right um
so actually that's why our Evolution
prepared us that oh if you gain weight
fight to hold it cuz sooner or later
you're going to have to lose it in a
famine anyway so evolve with this
Instinct that when we gain weight we
experience these biological changes that
make it harder to go back it's not
impossible willpower is a real thing
some people can do it but when you try
you are fighting against your own
biology you're also fighting against
your psychology and your environment for
different reasons we can explore so it's
not that dieting doesn't work but we've
got to be honest at any given time 177%
of people are on a diet we've really
tried that route right we've had you
know 40 Years of relentless ly promoting
dieting as the o or diet and exercise as
the only solutions and we've gotten
fatter and fatter and fatter so there's
something missing in that picture I
think it's partly set point Theory it's
also important for the drugs because
some people argue like the guy I
mentioned before in relation to the
brain Professor orelio G some of them
argue that what the drug may be doing is
actually resetting your biological set
point lowering the kind of temperature
at which your body tries to keep your
weight it's bringing your set point down
so that you don't get those effects like
the metabolism slowing and all the other
things that kick in when you try to lose
weight I think on average and this might
not be accurate but I think on average
we live more stressful lives than we
once did as well and I wonder the
relationship that are more stressful
more frantic more busy notification
filled social media driven screen time
lives are having on our relationship
with food and if there's a relationship
there at all you know more more kids
have ADHD now than ever you know
cortisol level seems to be skyrocketing
and it seems there's a relationship
between stress and appetite which is as
a gravitational force against our
willpower no you're totally right and
this is when I go through the 12 risks
of the the drugs in the book this is one
that I really worried about one that
played out for me so I noticed I had
this weird thing about six months since
taking the drug I had this realization
so I was losing a lot of weight right I
lost a huge amount of weight I lost
three stone three stone in what period
of time from from now to when I started
so just over a year and how quick how
quick was that weight loss just out of
Interest before we move on PR pretty
straight linear line downwards from from
the start but I had this strange
sensation I had a a my friend Danielle
was pregnant at the time I kept bumping
into her and it was like we we were on
opposite trajectories like she was
swelling and I was shrinking um I
remember walking away from her once and
thinking this is really weird I'm
getting what I want why don't I feel
better about this right I I didn't
actually feel that much better for quite
a long time for about six months
thinking why is that so what you mean by
better I felt quite m
in my emotions I
felt I felt I wouldn't say I definitely
wasn't
depressed but I felt a little bit dulled
I thought this is strange I thought
maybe it's just other things going on in
my life you never know when it's just an
individual but lots of people are
reporting this most people are very
happy when they take drugs but there's a
significant minority and so I started
looking at exactly this question the
psychology of eating and it turns out
there's kind of five the scientific
evidence for five reasons why we eat
um and obviously the first and most
important one is sustenance right I
would have thought if you'd asked me a
year ago why do you eat I would said
well the main reason is to sustain my
body but here I am eating so much less
than my body is sustained so all those
other calories I was consuming were
doing something else right and one of
the things one of the reasons we eat and
another one is pleasure which we've
talked about but another reason why
people eat is Comfort right people get a
tremendous amount of comfort out of food
particularly overeating can be very
comforting we know this partly because
whenever there's a stressful event uh
junk food orders massively go up after
911 there was a huge increase in
ordering people ordering pizzas and
fried chicken the night Trump won the
election in blue States on Uber Eats and
the other kind of delivery apps there
was a massive increase in people
ordering tacos you know um shitty food
right um if you if you're you're a man
and you lose your job your chances of
gaining weight massively increase partly
because it's so upsetting and you eat to
comfort yourself um and one of the
things that happens when you take these
drugs
is your ability to comfort eat is taken
away from you you can't Comfort eat and
we've got a good analogy I think a good
precedent for helping us think about how
that affects you so the best comparison
for these drugs if we're trying to
figure out their effects I think is
bariatric surgery right so up to now it
was very hard to sustainably lose like
more than 20% of your body weight the
only way it was possible to do it very
quickly was bariatric surgery I think we
have to look at the outcomes that's
stomach stapling there's four different
kinds of it but it's basically what we
think of a stomach stapling stomach
operation exactly that's one form of it
right and so I think you have to look at
the evidence from gastric surgery and in
some ways it's very encouraging so we
know that gastric band surgery and other
forms of gastric surgery massively boost
your health if you have one of these
operations over the next seven years you
are 56% less likely to die of a heart
attack 60% less likely to die of cancer
and 92% % less likely to die of diabetes
related causes in fact it's so good for
your health that of you are 40% less
likely to die of any cause over the next
seven years right so we know reversing
obesity massively boosts physical health
in most cases right sometimes very
dramatically but we also know from
bariatric surgery there's plenty of
downsides to bariatric surgery it's a
horrendous operation and one in a
thousand people die during the operation
it's Grim but we also know where I think
it's really important to the thing
you're asking about is that it has an
effect on your psychology so a lot of
people are much happier most people who
have that surgery are glad but 177% of
people who have that surgery have to
have impatient psychiatric treatment
afterwards because they're so depressed
or distressed your chances of committing
suicide almost quadruple after you've
had bariatric surgery and I think
there's lots of reasons why some of it
must be the grimness of the operation in
the aftermath but I think a lot of it is
you know you take away Comfort eating
from people right if you go through life
especially people who had gastric band
surgery or the other surgeries you know
those are people who were very severely
obese so they would have had this effect
very powerfully in their lives most of
them if you take away something that is
a key way of soothing
people when that goes well you can
rebuild your life you can find other
ways to get that soothing and that's
really valuable and important but a lot
of people just experience it as
profoundly painful and distressing and I
inter a lot of people like that when
people have those surgeries I read in
your book in chapter eight that one in
10 people then pick up a different type
of addiction to alcohol or gambling or
shopping or drugs or something else so
that's pretty clear evidence that
there's the psychological soothing is
just moving somewhere else it's
fascinating and and and distressing and
OB I spoke to people who'd been through
those what called an addiction transfer
um I spoke to this amazing woman called
Robin Moore who uh had been
303 she'd had um bariatric surgery
because just nothing else had worked and
she felt she was really a slave to that
was how she put it and it had this
incredible effect she she knew why she
had gained her gained weight so much in
her case it was she when she was a child
she had been sexually abused she'd been
raped and she'd never told anyone and
she quite deliberately gained weight in
order to keep men away from her she
thought well if I'm if I'm really fat
I'm less likely to be
attacked um which is surprisingly common
and she lost all this weight and she
felt great she felt physically much
better people were treating her much
better but she had this shift where she
she'd never been much of a drinker she
had a periods when she was at College
where she drank a fair bit but you know
she'd never been a heavy drinker and she
just quite rapidly became a very
full-blown alcoholic she used to work
out by the airport in Toronto and she
would you know drink on the way there
drink on the way back and she got fired
because she was drunk at work
eventually and um for her she she kind
of realized you know and I think it's
interesting ways to think about this in
relation to these
drugs I want to stress this is not going
to be everyone I don't think there's
even going to be a majority of people by
any
means
but when you take these
drugs the underlying psychological
reasons that drove your eating are
profoundly disrupted and in many cases
come to the surface and for me that was
help painful at first but helpful I
remember having a day in Vegas as you
know SP lot of time in Vegas cuz writing
a book about a series of crimes that
have been happening there I had dayse
investigating something really grim and
I I felt really bad and it was relating
to someone it's a long story but
something terrible and I went to the KFC
on West Sahara it's the grimmest KFC in
the whole world I have a secret love for
it and I on kind of
autopilot I ordered what I would always
have ordered you know like a load of
fried
chicken and I sat there and I thinking
oh [__] I can't eat this I remember
Colonel Sanders was on the wall looking
down and was like he was going to be
what happened to my best customer right
so being deprived of comfort eating is
is quite apart from the being deprived
of pleasure which I think is sort of
related but a bit different is is is
very difficult and again my friend who
I'd spoken to had cancer went to her and
said this is really hard right and she
said look it's not that the drug is
causing this problem the drug is making
this problem visible to you and now you
can deal with that in other ways right
and that's I've been trying to do and
write about how in the book but yeah so
one of the things that fascinated me
about all the research for for my book
magic pill
was how incredibly complex this is every
time you look at one effect it seems to
have another effect this is a really
complicated difficult topic and anyone
who's coming in telling you either rah
rah these drugs are great and they're
going to save us all or these drugs are
devils it's terrible um I don't think
it's leveling with people I think it's
complicated I think there's risks every
turn and I think we need to think
through the complexity together in a way
that's honest and and and honors the
complexity you talk there about the
impact that early childhood trauma has
on our relationship with food and eating
um I remember reading a little bit about
that in your previous book lost
connections as well but what is what
what is the sort of data in the stats
that that prove that trauma can cause us
to have this kind of excessive comt
seeking relationship with food is there
any particular studies that stand out
for you oh yeah I mean a guy that I got
to know quite well when I worked on Lost
connections and I thought about this
Research In a Different Light when I
worked on this book there's a guy called
doctor Vincent felitti and in the early
1980s he was a doctor in San Diego and
he was contacted by kaisa Permanente who
were a big not for-profit MediCal
provider in the
state and they said to him look we got a
problem we don't know what to
do obesity was massively Rising actually
it was very low by our standards but it
was hugely rising and they were trying
giving people diet plans and exercise
plans and nothing was working and they
said we don't know what to do can we
give you a load of money to just do blue
skies research go away figure out what
we can do and he said okay so he took a
load of money and then he's like what
can I do and he started working with 200
very very obese people people who were
severely obese who had tried all sorts
of ways to cut back and it hadn't worked
and he's sitting there working with them
and he's thinking what can I do and he
had an idea that sounds and actually is
quite stupid he said well what would
happen if really obese people literally
stopped eating and we medically
supervised it and we gave them vitamin
shots so they didn't get like scurvy or
whatever would they would they burn
through the fat stores in their body and
get back to a healthy weight so with a
shitload of medical supervision they did
it and Incredibly at first it worked
there was a woman who I'll call Susan
that's not her real name who went from
being more than 400 to 138 it was
incredible right and you know her family
are ringing the doctor and saying you
saved Susan's life she's really thrilled
and then one day something happened that
no one
expected she cracked she went to KFC or
wherever it was she starts obsessively
eating and after a while she's back
where she was not exactly where she'd
been but
similar and Dr feli called her in he
said
Susan what happened she looked down she
was obviously really ashamed she I don't
know I don't know he said well tell me
about that day right the day you cracked
did anything happened that day that
didn't happen any other day it turns out
something happened that day that had
never happened to season before um she
was in a bar and a man hit on her not in
a nasty way in quite a nice way but she
just felt completely freaked out and she
went and started eating and that's when
Dr feli said to her well Susan when did
you start gaining weight in her case I
think it was when she was 10 he said
well did anything happen when you were
10 that didn't happened when you were 9
or 11 or anything happened that year she
looked down and said well that's that's
when my grandfather started raping
me Dr Fel interviewed everyone in the
program he discovered that 60% of them
had made their extreme weight gain in
the aftermath of being sexually abused
or assaulted which is a staggering
figure right 60% of the women um and it
was like well how could this be he was
really puzzled and Susan explained it to
him really well she said overweight is
overlooked and that's what I need to be
right if you're severely overweight
you're much less likely to to be
sexually attacked right it's obviously
can happen but it's it's rarer um and
when you understand that you begin to
see again in relation to these drugs
um why some people get really freaked
out when they take these drugs because
some of them experience it as suddenly
oh my God I'm really vulnerable to this
traumatic event being reenacted again
and again now that's one example there's
lots of if we go down the the list of
reasons why people eat like I do in the
book there's lots of other ones that get
triggered and activated as and disrupted
as well you talk in the book about this
this word I've never really come across
before which is um it's a phrase I guess
you say the environment is
oogenic I I've only ever heard of that
term cogenic carcinogenic carcinogenic
yeah which basically means something can
give you cancer but you're saying that
the environment we live in is I mean the
way that I read it was like that that
it's almost contagious like it's going
to give me obesity just by being alive
in the modern world um one of the stats
that really stood out to me when you're
talking about processed food is that on
average when we eat processed food we we
end up eating 500 more calories every
single day and um that again is
startling you know I've had a few guests
on this podcast that I've talked about
processed food and the rise of it and I
do Wonder to myself if there's ever
going to be a change in society if we if
there's any indication that at some
point I don't know government will step
in and ban it or tax it more or
something will happen what's your what's
your view on if we talk about the
optimism of the penic environment
changing do you think it can change do
you think it will so crucially I went to
a country that had completely
transformed its diet and as a result has
very low obesity Japan we can talk about
that and I went to loads of countries
that are making the changes you're
talking about so prompt me to come back
to that but I would start by saying well
a you're totally right we live in an
obesogenic environment an obesogenic
environment is an environment that
primes you to be obese and where it's
hard to be a healthy weight right it's
hard to get healthy food healthy food is
expensive and rare whereas shitty food
that makes you obese is cheap abundant
and constantly promoted to you right so
that's an obesogenic environment and
there's loads of evidence that well as
Professor Michael L put it to me we live
in as obesogenic an environment as human
beings could possibly design right um
and there's seven ways in which
processed food undermines your ability
to stop eating that I go through in the
book so if you're feeling pessimistic
and I'm
clearly you're right to feel pessimistic
someone is charismatic and bril as
Michelle Obama could not even get us to
join a campaign to physically move so I
get it there's big obstacles here but
when you feel pessimistic about it the
first thing I would say is think about
smoking right my mother smokes 70
cigarettes a day there's a photograph of
me and her where I'm
um she's breastfeeding me I'm about six
months old she's smoking and resting the
ashtray on my stomach and when I showed
her this photo I thought she'd feel
guilty she said you were a [__]
difficult baby I needed that cigarette
um but you think about that that was
normal right when I mean in Scotland
that was normal when I was a kid right
um so you think about smoking when I was
seven years old um more than half of the
population of Britain smoked right and
people smoked everywhere people smoked
on the tube people smoked on planes
people smoked on game shows the doctor
would smoke while he was examining you
I'm not joking I remember that happening
right so if I could take you back to the
Britain of 1987 and you could walk
around you would just you would feel
sick because the smell of smoke was
everywhere right and there were just
ashtrays everywhere funny enough I was
with my mother when it was the
anniversary of there was a terrible
catastrophic fire at King's cross
station here in London in 1987 I think
and I was with my mother when it was the
anniversary a few years ago and uh it
was a terrible disaster there was a fire
someone had put out a cigarette near an
escalator and it killed more than 50
people it was awful uh and my mother
said oh that was the worst day of my
life and I said oh were you there did
you know someone who died she said no
that's the day they banned smoking on
the
tube anyway the so if I could take you
back and I said to you right how many
years we are on from that now um only
12% of British people will be will smoke
it will be falling and the British
government will be about to
progressively ban smoking you won't be
allowed to smoke indoors anywhere except
your own home the rates will have tanked
young people will there'll be almost no
cigarette smoking among young people and
they're going to progressively ban it by
age that would have seemed ludicrous
right you would have said well tobacco
industry is one of the most powerful
Industries in the whole world uh you've
got a very motivated half the population
are addicted it's never going to happen
these things can change that's a huge
Public Health uh transformation in a
very short period of time these things
can change and I've seen how it can
change with food so that we're not in
this situation where we have to choose
as we are at the moment between for many
of us not all between the risk of
obesity and the 12 big risks associated
with these drugs what are they waiting
for because the government knows this
the government knows that processed
foods and you know the sugar quantities
that the average person's eating is bad
so they could presumably get something
done this year so but they won't there's
a brilliant writer called Rebecca solnet
who says politicians are weather veins
and it's our job to be the weather if
you're a politician you're constantly
making a calculation right if I do this
thing how much praise will I get and how
much [__] will I get for it right and
you know some of them are good people
many of them are good people but you're
constantly making that calculation in a
democracy and right now if you do the
right thing on food and there are loads
of things we do I saw in Japan we can go
down the list of all the things we need
to do um that could transform Health
particularly for our children you'd get
some praise but you get a lot of [__]
right you get a lot of [__] for it and
for many years of my life I would have
been one of the people who gave them
that [__] right so I I understand it
we have to change that calculation by
helping people understand and make
better choices in ways that I saw happen
so I can explain how they did it if you
want please Japan is really important I
think for thinking about how we get out
of this trap because at the moment um
the way it's often presented is look
we're just screwed right there's just
this huge obese population that's the
product of being rich if you're a rich
country you've got lots of calories
around you inevitably we're going to
have loads of obesity and inevitably
we're just going to need to give loads
and loads of people these drugs forever
and you know a few years from now as
many people predicted to me we'll have
40% 50% of the population taking these
weight loss drugs right and what Japan
showed us is we don't have to choose
that fate right so if you look at Japan
Japan is the only country that got rich
without getting fat 4.5% of Japanese
people are obese compared to 26% in
Britain and
42.5% in United States and it's actually
42% 42% 4.5% are obese 70% are obese are
overweight right Jesus the norm is to be
obese or overweight right whereas in
Japan it's completely the opposite it's
kind of weird that when we picture Japan
we often picture sumo wrestlers it's a
bit like expecting the average American
to look like a bald eagle or something
right seers are completely atypical and
I learned a huge amount about what's
happening there so the first thing you
think when you hear that is it must just
be genetic right theyve just they've won
the genetic Lottery that must be what's
going on on but we know that's not true
because in the late 19th century loads
of Japanese people went to live in
Hawaii where I just was um and there's
now this settled Japanese population in
Hawaii who've been there for four or
five generations and they're almost as
fat as other Hawaiians right so they're
five times fatter than they're five
times more likely to be obese than
Japanese people in Japan so actually
when the environment changes Japanese
people become obese like everyone else
so there's something else going on so I
wanted to understand how did Japan do it
and one of the really interesting things
is it was very consciously done there's
a guy called Professor Barack kushna
who's a professor of East Asian history
in um in Cambridge University who's
talked about how actually if you go back
to the 1920s Japanese people had one of
the worst diets in the world they only
ate protein once a week they almost
never ate fish right they only ate fish
once a week they had a terrible diet and
the Japanese government at the time
wanted a healthy population so they
could form armies that would go and
invade the rest of Asia
so they deliberately transformed the
food culture in Japan very consciously
so I want to see how do they do that now
right what's going on so I went to a
school called COI school um which takes
kids from 5 to 18 and it was totally
fascinating so when I arrived there I
went with my
translator uh the first you arrive and
all the kids walk to school on their own
from the age of five all Japanese
children just leave the house and walk
to school on their own so they get a lot
of exercise in the morning and they walk
home on their own as well and we were
greeted at the entrance by a woman
called harumi tati who's the
nutritionist at the school by law every
Japanese school has to employ a
professional nutritionist it's a
difficult qualification to get it's
three years of study on top of learning
to be a teacher and your job is to
design and oversee the creation of the
food in the school all processed food is
banned no one is allowed to have Pro
there's no processed food in any
Japanese schools ever every meal has to
be prepared from scratch at the start of
the day um and no one is allowed to
bring it a pack lunch so every kid has
to eat the food that's prepared in the
school uh her job is also to use those
meals to educate the children about how
to eat healthily so they teach them all
sorts of key principles one of them is
in Japan this is a very deep cultural
norm you should only eat until you're
80% full so it it takes a while for your
body to realize you're full so if you
get the signal that you're full while
you're still eating they're like you've
eaten too much right so you should eat
until you're 80% full and then stop
um there's all sorts of norms that are
very different to ours so if you look at
a typical Japanese meal it will have
five portions significantly more than
USS but they're pretty small right so
you might have some fish some Mis miso
soup a whole range of things um and you
which is important for your gut health
because there's a bigger variety of
ingredients which makes your gut much
healthier but also you eat it
differently if you gave us you know a
meal with three bits generally you'd eat
all of one then all of another then all
of another you'd have all the lasagna
then you have the carrots or whatever in
Japan that's regarded as like a crazy
way to eat you have a mouthful of the
Miso soup then you have a mouth full of
the white fish then you have a mouth
full of the sashimi and you you have it
slows your eating
down massively if you eat that way um
they're also taught I remember her
standing there so the the meals in all
the schools are designed to be
nutritionally balanced through these
five components and so she stands in
front of the class and teaches the kid
kids you know okay this is a red rope
this represents calcium what does
calcium do kids it makes your bone
stronger like yes that's this on your
plate this represents carbohydrates what
do they do they give you energy and the
kids yell out so then and then she ties
the rope together she goes you see now
it's all tied together now it's a
balanced meal so they use this healthy
food to educate the children about how
to eat healthily it's a very um
beautifully designed system and it was
fascinating looking at them I mean got
tast stepen it was really weird this is
a school of a thousand children I walked
through that school all day there was
not one fat child it it it was it's odd
like it's jarring when you go right that
they have you know they have
extraordinarily low childhood
obesity and I remember with these kids I
was asking them their favorite foods the
first kid I asked said my favorite food
is broccoli it's like all right the
second kid said my favorite food is
seaweed and the third one's like I like
white rice and I said to CH my
translator are these kids trolling me
right like what their favorite foods are
broccoli and like white rice and she
just looked kind of puzzled and every
Japanese person I asked
said but we teach our children to like
healthy food don't your children like
healthy food and I was so taken about by
these kids I I brought up on my phone
some pictures of like typical British
school dinners and showed it to them and
they literally reacted like I had shown
them an Isis beheading video they like
screamed they were like
what is this and one said did you eat
this every day I was like yes they're
saying where's the salad I said there is
no salad they're just completely baffled
so they partly start with
this very strong culture creating a very
deliberate culture of how to eat
differently that begins at a very very
young age there are some other steps
that are a bit more dodgy that we can
come to I'm sure but that that was the
kind of um first um that was the first
pillar of it that I saw and then over
here we're in we're in this sort of
craze of injecting ourselves with this
thing called a zek can I see the pen
actually I've never actually seen one
before I won't open it or anything sure
course I W contaminate it Z I've just
been so intrigued to see what these
things are
like once
weekly Nova nordis Nova Nordisk now the
most valuable company in the whole of
Europe what what are they give me some
context on Nova Nordisk they're a Danish
pharmaceutical company so there's two
companies that are kind of pushing the
main drugs in this pushing sounds too
there you know what I mean so Novo
Nordisk who a Danish company the entire
Danish economy has had a massive growth
because of the popularity of these drugs
since they came out they've become the
most valuable company in Europe um the
market for these drugs is predicted to
be $200 billion do by the end of this
decade and the other one is Eli
Lily and if I how do I get this do I
have to go to a doctor and get a
prescription or can I just go buy this
on online or something so this is part
of the problem and this leads to one of
the really big risks associated with the
drugs which is eating disorders I am
really really worried about this so
there are lots of young girls in
particular some boys but it's mostly
girls who want to starve themselves
right we know that it hugely Rose during
the pandemic and this is the most
effective tool for self- starvation
human beings have ever come up with so I
interviewed a lot of Eating Disorders
experts who are terrified about what's
coming down the line and the truth is it
is very easy to get hold of it I went
you know you could go online now you
clearly do not meet the criteria for
getting these drugs right you've got to
have a BMI of higher than 27 which is a
BMI that comes from fat Mass not muscle
mass so you would not meet the criteria
at all if you went online you could go
and see a doctor on Zoom lie about your
BMI and you would get it in the mail two
days later right um they're meant to
check your BMI but on Zoom that's very
hard to do if in the unlikely event you
were turned down by a doctor on Zoom you
can just order effectively counterfeit
ones online very very easily so I'm EXT
extremely wide I think we're going to
have a there are many downsides to these
drugs possibly the worst from my point
of view one of the two or three worst is
you're going to have a huge wave of
young women who get hold of these drugs
and and do a lot of harm to themselves
now that is something we can immediately
do to massively limit that harm uh lots
of the Eating Disorders experts I
interviewed like Dr Kimberly Dennis
who's one of the leading experts in the
US said to me these drugs should only be
given by prescription if you go to a
physical doctor and the doctor you
physically go to to get them needs to be
trained in detecting eating disorders
and referring people for help with
eating disorders if that's what they
think they've got so these were
initially created for people that had
diabetes they have a dual effect so glp1
the hormone gp1 and this kind of replica
of it uh stimulates the creation of
insulin which is obviously what
diabetics are lacking either type one or
type two diab ICS so it was the whole
thing was discovered by accident I
interviewed the guy who discovered it a
guy called Daniel draer amazing man so
they discovered he was just looking at
um so your whole body is made out of
cells right and in the 70s it was
discovered there were new ways of
looking inside cells that human beings
had never had before so by the 80s 1984
was when he made a breakthrough they
were just going through different cells
in the human body trying to figure out
what they do and they got to the
glucagon Gene which exists inside your
your pancreas and they were trying to
figure out the glucon gene is a long
chain and at the end of it is gp1 and
they were trying to figure out well can
you break off that little bit of the
chain or if you break it off does it
just wither and die and he discovered Dr
duer discovered you can break it off and
then he was like well what does it do so
he starts experimenting in lab dishes in
Massachusetts General Hospital and he
discovered that if you combine it with
insulin it produces more insulin so
that's why it's so valuable for
diabetics and immediately he was like
whoa that's really significant so then
other people in the lab um Professor
spana mjoy um gave it to rats put it in
rats and discovered it in fact produced
insulin in rats a team in Copenhagen put
it into the pancreas of pigs discovered
it produced insulin there and that
setting set in train what later became
giving it to diabetics so that's the
most one obviously greatest benefit of
these drugs that was initially
discovered is they hugely helped
diabetics then the effects around
appetite were discovered separately
initially here in in London in the
Hammer Smith hospital that was when they
discovered oh if you inject people with
gp1 this is before they had copies of it
if you inject people with gp1 it reduces
their appetite oh okay you can see where
their thinking went from there so
there's dual uses and the Dual uses are
kind of incredible if you look at uh the
effects on diabetics obvious but um if
you look at the health effects we that
are emerging around these drugs and this
is very close to my heart literally
because of the heart problems in my
family um if you take these drugs if you
started with a BMI higher than 27 and
you take these drugs over the next 5
years you are 20% less likely to have a
heart attack or stroke so we're talking
about this is some people are like oh
this is Vanity and there's an element of
vanity in me and in most people taking
these drugs I'm sure but this is having
massive health benefits for lots of
people how many people are willing to
take it because as you as we discuss
this now say that there's I don't know a
million 10 million people that listen
what percentage of those people on
average would go do you know what that
sounds like the thing I've been looking
for if they're Americans and the polling
is Right 47% of Americans have said they
would be willing to take they want to
take these drugs actively want oh they
want to so about 50% of this a the
audience will be actively wanting to
take it as we sit here now yeah and now
tell me
why they shouldn't well there's a huge
array of risks um some of which are very
very serious so I'll give you a few
examples I go through Lots in the book
there's a professor in France called
Professor Jean Luke F who works at the
University Hospital in melier who was
commissioned by the French medicines
agency to investigate these drugs and
the safety around these drugs and one of
the reasons lots of people have felt
very happy about the safety of these
drugs and it's a good reason is that in
their roll out for obesity if people
have said like Daniel duer for example
who I mentioned who discovered
gp1 they say quite rightly well look
diabetics have been taking these drugs
for 18 years
now if there was some catastrophic
effect we would know it would have
emerged in diabetics right now he would
also add well it could affect obese
people a bit differently than diabetics
so there's some gaps in the knowledge he
said look we this drug has been used by
enormous numbers of people all over the
world without some huge safety concern
emerging but others have said okay let's
really dig into those diabetics then so
that's what Professor f e did so they've
got they've got very good health
databases in France the best in the
world so he decided to look at diabetics
who' taken these drugs for three years
sometime between 2006 and I think 2015
so he looks at loads of the diabetics
who' taken them and then he compared
them to a group of other diabetics who
were very similar in every other way but
had not taken these drugs to see are
their differences and outcome and he was
particularly looking for one outcome we
know that when you give these drugs to
rats they are much more likely to
develop thyroid cancer so he's looking
okay is there a difference in thyroid
cancer risk in this population
and what he discovered was very sobering
it was published so the people who'
taken the drugs had a 50 to 75% increase
in their risk of thyroid cancer now when
I first said that I was like what the
[__] you have to understand what that
doesn't mean that doesn't mean 50 to 75%
of people who take the drug get thyroid
cancer if it was that outcome they would
pull it immediately and no one would
ever take it again what it means is
whatever your thyroid cancer risk was at
the start it will go up by between 50 to
75% if this res Arch is correct right
this then is being further investigated
there are some scientists who dispute it
the European medic medicines agency has
not been persuaded by the evidence so
far but that's pretty sobering right
that's you know 1.2% of people get
thyroid cancer in their lifetime 84% of
them I think survive you know a big
increase in people getting thyroid
cancer when you're talking about
millions of people across the world
taking it is is very
alarming what about this thing called
zmek face yeah I'm not worried about
that purely purely for a selfish reason
so a zic face is where um I'm worried
about it for other people a zic face is
where you lose so much weight that your
face looks really gaunt and you look
kind of hollow and a bit my face is so
naturally round like babies always smile
at me I think because they think I'm
their King I'm just like a baby that
inexplicably got to walk around um I'm I
could lose so much weight in my face and
not look G I'm not worried about that
myself it's there's no um health problem
with OIC face it's just it's the vanity
thing well vanity is too negative a word
it's you know people don't want to look
gone and Ill that's fair enough
pancreitis pancreatitis is a rare side
effect but it's very very unpleasant so
um pancreatitis is basically where uh
your pancreas just goes Haywire as a
result of taking these drugs I
interviewed a woman called Michelle stnc
who's in mytle beach in North Carolina
she she started taking these drugs and
her doctor said to her you know there's
a few side effects one of them is
pancreatitis and she said go no my luck
I'll probably get it she starts take it
was really happy with the weight loss
six weeks later she went to Pittsburgh
to visit her daughter she woke up in the
worst Agony she's ever been in she had
this excruciating pain running all from
below her breast around to her back she
was vomiting she was [__] herself
she was screaming in pain and her
son-in-law phoned for an ambulance he
thought she was about to die she was in
such a state of distress she arrives at
the hospital and they um discover gone
really wrong with her pancreas they said
are you a heavy drinker she said no then
they said are you taking OIC and it's
kind of revealing that was the second
question they asked so we know that um
if you take OIC there's a study by the
University of British Columbia that
found it increases your risk of
pancreatitis by a factor of nine so
you're nine times more likely to get it
it's still rare you're very unlikely to
get pancreatitis even when you times it
by nine it's still a very rare outcome
but you know doctors often compare it to
the pain of being stabbed Michelle said
to me it was much worse than the pain of
child birth right they had to give a
fenil to take the pain away so if you
get medical care you recover but so it's
worth people knowing that is a
significant risk uh of just an
excruciatingly painful condition one of
my friends has started taking a zmek you
know there's this word on the side of
this pen in front of me semaglutide
semaglutide yeah what did I say it's you
said it the way it's intuitive the way
the scientist say I think it says it
looks like semaglutide exactly that's
how I said it until all the scientists
kept correcting me in a slightly
patronizing way but yeah what's the
actual word semaglutide and is that the
chemical and is thenex the brand yeah
exactly so semaglutide so there's
there's several Brands um so there's
seaglide which is the drug which has
this gp1 Agonist effect um OIC is the
one for diabetes wovi is the one for
obesity that exactly the same drug
they're made in the same Factory they're
identical it's just that wovi is
marketed for obesity and you you can in
the US not here yet prescribe wovi for
higher doses than you would for for for
diabetics and then there's other drugs
that are coming along the line so
there's munaro which is made by Eli Lily
so oena wovi produces an average of 15%
loss of body weight over a year mojarro
causes a loss of 21% on average and the
next one that will come down the line is
probably going to come out next year
Triple G causes 24.2% the reason mararo
Works differently so this only works on
gp1 munaro adds another gut hormone Gip
so it works on two gut hormones not just
one and Triple G works on three gut
hormones and there's going to be more
and more drugs I mean there's 37 gut
hormones that can affect appetite they
think so there's going to be lots of
variance of these drugs with different
side effect profiles different risks
different benefits so yeah this is you
know one of the South African
psychiatrist called Carell laru who's
been at the absolute Forefront of the
developments and they said to me you
know when a baby starts to walk it's
been crawling for ages and then it just
stands up and it walks and we are at
that point and it was striking how how
much the scientists kept describing it
as a game changer you know one of them
Tim Spectre who I think you might have
had on described as um it's like they
found the Holy Grail they found the
thing that causes weight loss right uh
Robert Kushner said that to me who's
another one of the scientists been at
the heart of it said we cracked open the
treasure chest we found the thing that
controls weight it's your gut hormone B
so I worry about the parallels with
previous diet drugs and we can talk
about that these are new drugs working
in a new way and the the overwhelming
feeling in the science is no this really
is different my friend is um a biotech
billionaire and um when I when I saw him
so he's at the very Forefront of all of
these things he takes so many different
things to optimize his life one of them
he started taking as a zek and last time
I saw him he was um we're in the gym
together and he was significantly weak
he was significantly skinnier but I
noticed when we did our exercises he was
significantly weaker as well and that
strikes me as a bit of an unspoken about
side effect is muscle loss it's one of
the 12 big risks that I write back in
the book so muscle mass loss is a real
problem people who don't know muscle
mass is the total amount of soft tissue
that you have in your body and it's
essential for doing anything that
requires movement and strength basically
and any form of weight loss causes a
reduction in muscle mass so if you if
someone's bur overweight and they lose a
huge amount of weight on a diet they
lose a lot of muscle mass hopefully you
lose more fat mass than muscle mass but
you lose a lot of muscle mass you can't
control that right you just there's no
way to lose a lot of weight that doesn't
involve some muscle mass loss unless
you're very very lucky right um so
obviously this triggers a huge amount of
muscle mass loss and there's real
worries with that right um if you lose
muscle mass so you naturally lose muscle
mass from when you're 30 onwards anyway
you lose quite a lot every year it's
incredibly depressing when you look at
the figures you lose muscle mass natur
every year anyway um but if you lose too
much muscle mass you won't you'll be a
bit weaker now but the real risks are
when you're older so if you have really
low muscle mass when you're older you're
at risk of a condition called sarcopenia
which is Greek for poverty of the flesh
basically just means you'll really
struggle to climb the stairs do any kind
of physical activity you're more likely
to fall if you do fall you're more
likely to die it's it's quite a serious
thing and this I think is particularly
going to be an issue for people who are
already skinny like the people at that
party we were talking about right at the
start none of them were fat at the start
right people who were already skinny who
are taking it to be super skinny they're
going to see they're going to have real
issues with their muscle mass likely
when they're older so this is a very
serious problem we could be building up
a time bomb of more frail older people
further down the line you lose up to 20
to 30% of your lean muscle mass when you
start taking a zet says in your book as
one of the RIS Prof that's for for some
people yeah not actually weirdly was 33%
fat Mass when I started and I went down
to 22% I think it is now so I lost
nothing but fat Mass but I suspect that
might be for the slightly humiliating
reason that I had no muscle to start
with but I'm not sure and then on the
psychology the mental health side of
things suicidality there's some cases
where suicidality things like feelings
of anxiety and depression increase is
that because of the underlying reasons
why we're eating the self- soothing
stuff or is that a separate side effect
so it's hugely debated there isn't even
agreement that the drugs C caus that
effect in a minority of people you got
to bear in mind at any given time some
of the population becomes suicidal some
of them will be taking these drugs so
it's very hard to disentangle that
especially early on uh so some
scientists would say there isn't even
any evidence they cause suicidality
among the scientists who fear that it
may cause suicidality there's a big
debate some of it will be you're
deprived of comfort food uh or pleasure
some of it will be as Carell Laro put it
to me a lot of people who are over wait
for a long time say you know the reason
my life is [__] is cuz I'm overweight if
I finally lose weight my life will be
good and then they lose weight and
they've still got the same assle husband
and they've still got the same job they
don't like and they suddenly go into
this crisis where they're like oh it
wasn't the weight that was blocking me
it was everything else right they say
don't they that um the difference
between like happiness is your
expectations and reality so you can
imagine if you have that expectation
that losing this weight is going to make
me happy and you fall short of the
expectation because it doesn't the
anticlimax can cause so much
psychological discomfort yeah and I
spoke to people who've been through that
and I think that's that that can be a
really a really big issue there's also
with Su suicidality so some other people
who would say well okay the
psychological effects are probably real
but it might come back to what we were
saying about dampening the reward system
in the brain right there were people
like um Professor Patricia grigson who's
done some of the really cutting edge
research on effects with addiction in
this who said to me you know that's a
real concern now she stress we don't
know yet no one definitively said yes it
is causing these problems we know how it
was weird it was like a um like I said
before it's you're seeing this picture
form it was fascinating that you're
there's so much we don't know which
makes it kind of disconcerting it's like
oh so this is an experiment on millions
of people and I'm one of the guinea pigs
great right so it's disconcerting how
much we don't know um but yeah that is a
big worry and we've been here before
with diet drugs as you alluding to where
we kind of rush into party and then
everyone rushes out of the party because
we realize that the history of diet
drugs Steven is absolutely Grim beyond
belief so the first kind of modern diet
drug was something called dinitrophenol
so there were a load of um people in
France who were working in ammunition
factories during the first world war and
people noticed that they lost loads of
weight right not that they had didn't
have weight problems at the start but
they lost a huge amount of weight and it
turned out they were ingesting this
explosive powder you know through their
skin and breathing it in so after the
war a load of scientists at Stanford
were like oh maybe this can be a weight
loss treatment so they made it into a
pill called redu alls uh which were very
popular there was 100,000 people taking
them in 1934 which when you consider
there was very low obesity back then
that's a huge number of
people and then they discovered just I
mean it's it it's almost unbelievably
terrible what happened so loads of the
people taking them went
blind and then they went into this
horrific fever where their bodies were
burning up so it's an explosive right so
it was discovered that the way it works
is it massively speeds up your
metabolism but when you take a high dose
it gives you cataracts makes you go
blind and then your body goes into a
fatal fever and the way one person put
it is you become cooked from the inside
so they stopped marketing that one it
continued to be used as a pesticide for
like years and years because it is so
good at killing anything it comes across
so then there was a craze for amphetamin
so during again during the a war during
the second world war radar um people are
to watch Radars soldiers who had to
watch Radars were extremely bored so
they gave them amphetamines to sort of
keep them on the job keep them active
mentally alert and it was discovered
they lost loads of weight as well so
after the war they started marketing
amphetamines as a weight loss drug right
and they became hugely popular they were
described as Mother's Little Helper by
the time you get to 1970 8% of all the
prescriptions in the United States were
F amphetamines for weight loss but it
was discovered that when you take
amphetamines you develop tolerance to
them your body gets used to them so you
need higher and higher doses to get the
same effect but if you take really high
doses of amphetamines you just lose it I
mean you can become psychotic you it has
a really bad effect on you you don't
sleep it's terrible so then there was a
real rolling back of amphetamines and
then there were some real horror shows
like Jaw wiring where they would wire up
the jaws of obese people so they could
they literally couldn't get any food
into their mouths but then it was
discovered if you vomit while your jaw
is wide you can choke to death I mean
just like nightmare marish horrifying
humiliating Solutions and then we get to
the worst of them all and also the most
popular of them all until these new
drugs which is called fenfen so this was
in the 1990s early 1990s a group of
scientists decided to combine two diet
drugs that had existed until then one
was called Flex fomine it's an appetite
suppressant but it was never very
popular because it makes you very drowsy
so they combined it with phentramine
which is an amphetamin so it had the
kind of it counteracted the drowsiness
and it had an additional weight loss
effect and it worked incredibly well
people taking it lost as much weight as
they lose on OIC and it's actually Eerie
when you go back and look at the
coverage front page of Time Magazine the
new miracle drug was the headline you
know by the time you got to the mid90s
there were 18 million prescriptions for
fenfen every year in the
US and then a group of ordinary doctors
in Fargo in North Dakota were like a lot
of our patients are getting really ill
when they take this and raised a safety
signal turned out the drug company had
known about this risk all along so it
was discovered that when you take these
drugs they cause something called
primary pulmonary hypertension it's
where the blood vessels in your lungs
massively contract and you can't breathe
properly they also damage your heart I
mean the stories were just horrendous
there was a um a young woman in
Massachusetts called Mary linen who was
about 28 wanted to lose weight for her
wedding day starts taking fenfen couple
of weeks later is trying to climb a hill
and just gets really breathless and it's
like so weird here goes home is really
breathless goes to the doctor he takes
her off the drug but by then she had the
problem um she needed oxygen her whole
life she was told she could never have
children and then one day she she
couldn't breathe and she died this
happened to lots and lots of people it
led to the largest payout in the history
of the pharmaceutical industry up to
that point they had to pay 12 billion
dollar to the people whose hearts and
lungs were harmed
and that is not that long ago now I want
to stress again that was given to people
with a very poor there was a single
study of 120 people of fenfen at the
point at which it was marketed to people
which is staggering this has a much
bigger body of evidence so this is not
going to be in the short-term fenfen but
when I looked at the 12 big risks
associated with these drugs some of
which have not really been explained to
the
public one of the ones that was most
disconcerting and was explained to me by
a brilliant scientist called Greg
Stanwood who Florida State University
and is researching these
drugs the biggest risk is what he called
unknown unknown so you remember that
Donald Rumsfeld thing right so when he
was talking about um the invasion of
Afghanistan but um when he was the US
Secretary of Defense said you know when
it comes to these things there are
things there are what called known
knowns there are things we know we know
there are known unknowns there are
things we know we don't know where is
Osama bin Laden and there are unknown
unknowns things we don't know we don't
know that might hit us out of the blue
and with these drugs there's a big worry
about longer term unknown unknowns so
for example we know very little about
what happens to pregnant women when
they're taking these drugs right we know
that in the animal studies um when
animals are other non-human animals are
exposed to these drugs they're much more
likely to get birth defects so one thing
Dr Stanwood said that we should think
about and he stressed this is
speculative we don't know was think
about antipsychotics right in the 1950s
doctors started giving people antis
psychotics they were judged to be safe
lots of people dispute that but park
that for a second and people took them
for many many decades and then it was
discovered really late in the day that
when you get into your 70s and 80s if
you've been taking antis psychotics you
are much more likely to get Alzheimer's
disease and other forms of dementia like
much more likely now there's no way you
could have known that at the start it
was an unknown unknown you couldn't have
known that you had to have people taking
it for a really long time before you
could find that out now one of the
concerns about these drugs is that there
will be unknown unknowns that we can't
know about these drugs are working on
your brain they are working very hard on
key parts of your brain parts that
relate to memory processing taste
processing um gut motility right we
don't know but there's at least some
risk there now again you have to weigh
that against the risks of obesity as Dr
sha alevy who's at tillan school of
medicine put it to me we don't know the
long-term risks of these drugs we do do
know the long-term risks of obesity and
they are horrific really horrific and
much worse than I thought at the start
you know for example I'm actually quite
embarrassed to say this diabetes right
okay I knew that you were much more
likely to become diabetic if you were
obese um figures on that are kind of
shocking if you're obese when you're a
teenager your your chances of developing
diabetes are 70% in your life right
shocking but I thought all right
diabetics they get insulin and then
they're basically like the rest of us
right as long as you've got Healthcare
you're fine interviewing doctors they
were like no no no lots of people think
that if you get diabetes it it knocks on
average 15 years off your life there's a
doctor here Dr Max pton a close friend
of mine and a brilliant Doctor Who Says
something to me it seemed really
shocking when he first said it but then
he went through the evidence he said if
you gave me a choice between getting
diabetes or becoming HIV positive I
would choose HIV every time if you
become HIV positive as long as you get
medical treatment you live as long as
everyone else if you get diabetes you
know not only does it knock 15 years off
your life your chances of all sorts of
catastrophic complications in your life
are really high it's the biggest single
cause of blindness in Britain
preventable cause of blindness it's
massive cause of leg amputation more
people get an extremity cut off in the
US because of diabetes every year than
because of being shot right I mean it's
and you go down the list of all the
harms associated with
obesity diabetes isn't even number one
right so every time I talk about the
risk of these drugs I really worry about
the risk of these drugs right there it's
a lot of them people should go through
it very carefully if you have thyroid
cancer in your family for example I
would strongly recommend you don't take
them if you know you're already um
worried about your muscle mass don't
take them there's a whole range of
caveats and clauses but we have got to
be honest about the risk of obesity and
for me if I'm being honest I think the
choice was ongoing obesity or these
drugs and so for me personally I have
made the Judgment call after looking at
all of this evidence that I'd rather
take the risk of OIC than the risk of
ongoing obes it especially given my
family's history and how many men Die
Young of heart attacks but loads of
people will look at the evidence that I
present in Magic pill and take totally
the opposite point of view and they may
well turn out to be right and I might
well turn out to be wrong right I
wouldn't debar that there's a fenfen
like scenario down the road right I
don't it's not likely but you'd be a
fool to dismiss it it I am in a
different camp and I have to say before
I express my own opinion that I
understand there's a lot of people out
there where drugs like this will
literally save their life and if they
don't take these drugs then you know
you've gone through some of the stats
but they I mean they will probably die
from something you know some kind of
form of uh you know we talk about all
cause mortality a lot like something
will kill you in the next couple of
years whether it's a cardiovascular
issue or something related to another um
element related to obes
obesity my thing and this is I think
developed over time we're doing this
podcast and speaking to so many experts
in health and fitness and wellness and
psychology and psych Psychiatry is I
just have this really deep innate belief
that there's no such thing as a free
lunch in life and I've just The more
I've done these interviews The more I've
come to learn that everything is a
trade-off and I almost see life as like
a scale so if you if you if you if you
put a weight on one end there's going to
be an equal and an opposite Force
somewhere else you know like the what's
the law of physics is it Einstein that
said that that you can't like destroy
energy you can just move it and I think
about the same with like drugs often and
other things that seem like Miracles or
shortcuts you're you're moving the set
of issues somewhere else you've talked
about some of those movements uh today
like the psych psychological transfer of
a uh soothing Behavior to an addiction
for example that's always been my like
belief that um whenever one my friends
says Steve I'm taking this uh Limitless
pill mfil and it's making me super
productive and it's fixed all my
problems in life and I'm killing the
game now I go what's the cost yeah and
my friend said to me remember when he
started taking it he was like there's no
cost there's no side effects and my
brain goes history shows if you wait
long enough there's always a cost it's
just being conscious of the cost and
when you balance up as you've done in
your life the pros and cons you say okay
I'm willing to take the cost now when I
I see things like a zek and people say
to me there is no downside I get more
scared because I can't run the numbers
to see whether the cost is worth the
upside for me so I don't know what the
the big obvious downsides of a zek and
these magic drugs are but I feel like
logically there must be one we do know
there are some
medications where pretty dependably the
benefits outweigh the risk think about
statins right if you have a problem with
your cholesterol what statins do is they
block part of your body that makes
cholesterol right so it's the most
commonly prescribed drug in the US it's
pretty close to it in Britain almost
every doctor would agree there are some
downsides to statins but sometimes there
are just like you have to stay on them
for life right yeah you have toay like
with these drugs right the minute you
stop taking them so within a year of
stopping you regain 70% of the weight
you've lost right this is one of the big
questions around these drugs now that's
not 100% uh of the people regain it um
but it's most people seem to regain
their weight so I think there are
sometimes when a drug a medication I'm
not saying these drugs are that
definitely not but there are some
medications which do seem to be
just not that there's no cost but the
benefits are really unambiguous and
massively outweigh the cost this is a
much more finally judged thing and it's
interesting to me it's been funny
talking to people who read the book
because remember talking to the
marketing teams at both my Publishers
because some people who were the first
people to read the book apart from my
friends so some of them came up to me
and said oh yeah Han I loved your your
book it made me really want to take oen
piic someu came up to me and said Yan I
loved your book it made me think
convinced that you'd have to be
completely insane to take o zic and it
was a bit like you know the dress the uh
some people saw it as gold some people
saw it as
blue and I felt like that meant I'd done
my job because unlike pretty much
everything else I've ever
written I've ended this feeling as
conflicted almost as I was at the start
right this is a huge thing it's going to
change and we've talked a lot about the
personal dilemmas it's going to have a
huge social effect Barkley's Bank
commissioned a very sober-minded analyst
named Emily field to um make predictions
that could guide investment based on
these drugs and she said if you want an
analogy you have to think of the
invention of the smartphone right I mean
this is going to have so many
unpredictable effects um already crispy
K cream donut stocks have been tanking
the head of nestle Mark Schneider has
said we they're worried about their ice
cream and infection ranges and Jeff
Financial did a report for the airlines
in the US saying they're going to have
to spend much less on jet fuel pretty
soon because it cost takes so much less
jet fuel to fly a much thinner
population what I was fascinated by is
um companies that manufacture hinges for
knee and hip replacements are seeing
their stocks tank because people are
going to need far fewer neon hip
replacements cuz that overwhelmingly
that's driven by obesity right so not
entirely but overwhelmingly
um so yeah if we were talking in 2007
when the day Steve Jobs unveiled the
iPhone I don't think we could have
gained
out you know one tenth of what was about
to hit us and I kept having these
moments traveling all over the world
interviewing these experts remember one
day I was in a cafe I was interviewing
one of the key
neuroscientists at Cambridge University
who was working on this we were in a
cafe and there were loads of people
walking past and it's you know just
random British people a lot of whom are
overweight or obese like I
was and I thinking wow you don't know
what's about to hit us all it was a
slightly weird unreal feeling I mean
this is is for better and for worse and
I think there will definitely be
positive effects and there will
definitely be negative effects and I
think we can see early on what quite a
lot of them are this will change the
lives of all of us in one way or another
how do you guys manage your stress this
is Stress Awareness Month and it's a
topic that I'm super passionate about
and we talk about a lot in this podcast
I personally manage my stress by
prioritizing my health and well-being
going to the gym is my number one form
of therapy and I couldn't be without
those two things as you guys know whoop
is a sponsor of this podcast and I'm an
investor in the company as well for
those of you that don't know whoop
actually created a stress monitor within
this device not only does this helped me
to identify periods of high stress in
real time throughout the day but it also
provides me with the tools I need to to
deal with stresses as they come up
throughout the day and it's based on
scientifically backed breathing
exercises and research that's been
developed by Leading neuroscientists
it's a feature that has been
gamechanging for me and I highly
recommend if you're someone that's
looking to manage your stress levels
then head over to join. woop.com
CEO where we'll give you 30 days
risk-free and zero commitment to try
whoop let me know how you get on I'm
just I was thinking as you were speaking
there about bunch of Statistics that
I've read recently humans are getting
more and more sedentary which means
we're moving a lot less um obviously
obesity is going up across the sort of
Western World um most
obviously uh and then you've got this
rise in a zmek which allows us to stay
skinny basically and suppress our
appetite I was just wondering there's
going to be it feels like there's going
to be two groups of people when these
drugs drop in cost and they become
really accessible and i' I've saw you
say in the book that the next sort of
iteration of these drugs is going to be
a pill a lot of people won't want to
inject something I'm one of the people
that just I'd get too squeamish about
having to inject myself so the minute
something becomes a pill it brings down
one of the psychological barriers it's
cheap it's a pill a lot of people are
doing it if you're not doing it in the
obesogenic whatever that long word was
environment we live in it's almost like
you're going to be a an inferior human
to some degree like there's going to be
two parts of society the 50% that are
down to take the pill and they're going
to be skinny and they're going to be
whatever and then the 50% that are
struggling in this this difficult food
environment we live in with the ultra
processed food um I can't I almost can't
play out a scenario where most people
aren't taking this magic pill so there's
a few assumptions of what you've said um
I think you're probably right but
there's a few assumptions so in a way
what you're saying there's sort of few
different dystopias that could
emerge one is actually that we don't
even get to where you are because it's
restricted to a tiny number of rich
people right so let's start with the
first like dystopian Vision we could
have the first is that we never even get
to that point let's imagine we basically
we have a situation at the moment where
the Real Housewives of New Jersey get to
be super super skinny and the real
school children of New Jersey get
diabetes at the age of 12 right so we
could have a situation where these drugs
exist and they work very well but they
are restricted to a tiny Elite of rich
people which is kind of where we are
it's not going to stay like that though
is it in the longer term it won't and
it's not that far off so 2032 The Paton
on OIC passes so then it's not actually
that expensive to make these drugs it's
$40 a month to actually make them it's
the rest is profits for NOA Nordisk who
argue understandably you know look we
took all the risks of developing this we
should cash in now um you can see that
argument although I don't think they
need to cash in quite as much as they
are uh so one scenario is it go it will
go out of patent in
2032 by then it looks like the main way
of taking some agati will be pills
anyway so you can well imagine in a
situation where you've got $40 a month
to take a daily pill that will make you
much thinner I think in that scenario
you're right now what I'm most
hope is that a the drugs don't have a
catastrophic side effect obviously B the
people who want them get them and see it
wakes us up and we go how did we get to
this point how did we get to the point
where we're looking at potentially
drugging our children forever not
knowing the long-term effects
who did this to us and how can we be
more like Japan and all the other
countries that are making these changes
that's optimistic that requires a lot of
uh raising of Consciousness between now
and then but that's the most optimistic
scenario thing but you're totally right
there could be a a scenario it's
probably the most likely scenario if
there isn't some big risk that emerges
that we'll just have staggering amounts
of the population taking these
drugs unless the government intervene
that feels like the most likely scenario
unless the government introdu some laws
that put restrictions on what children
can eat at school and all those kinds of
things in a more severe way I can't see
a scenario where especially with this
younger generation you know you hear all
these stats around young girls on Tik
Tok being more anxious than ever before
the suicidality going up men are
struggling more than ever with body
dysmorphia which no one's talking about
I was reading some stats about that
yesterday yeah shocking the figures on
that and the antidote appears to be I
mean
this it's not a good solution right and
perfectly normal healthy people who just
have a little bit of belly fat and they
hear this you know they hear about this
stuff they go you know going to the gym
is hard and I do love those burgers and
that KFC is really nice it does tastes
really good so I could eat my KFC and I
could stay skinny I think that last bit
then they're wrong you you if you take
it you won't want to eat the KFC in the
burgers and believe me I have been the
king of KFC just three bites I got a
couple of bites though well but you
don't get you actually don't even want
that particularly right and huge numbers
of people seeing that I mean for most of
the time I have been eating smaller
portions of similar [__] but um actually
even your taste for that tends to kind
of Wayan over time right so the last
bit's wrong but I think yeah you it's
one of the things it's funny I
didn't it's one of the things that made
me really angry in
Japan I was
thinking all this agonizing I've done
all this worrying and I worry even more
about the fact we're almost certainly
about to start a mass wave of drugging
children with asmic already begun in the
US I interviewed parents who drugging
their kids because their children are
obese and I thought this whole dilemma
never had to happen right this happened
because the food industry screwed us
over and we didn't regulate them and we
didn't stop them and we can start to do
that and I went to places that have done
it I went to Mexico where they
introduced a sugar tax usually reduce
the amount of sugar that people consume
I went to Minneapolis where they
prescribe healthy food for poorer people
who can't afford it has a a really
positive effect I went to Finland where
they had a huge transformation in the
food supply I went to Japan there's load
here in Britain there was a really
interesting experiment bread used to
have far more salt in it and a really
heroic guy called Professor Gran
McGregor who I interviewed persuaded the
government to just to get the food
companies to sort of lore them I mean
they would have they threatened
regulation which meant that the
companies gave in before they did it to
just massively reduce the amount of salt
in bread no one even noticed and it
reduced Strokes every year in written by
between 6,000 and 9,000 right and a
stroke is one of the worst things that
can ever happen to you now we could do
it's called reformulation there's loads
of other things we can do like that we
could reformulate loads of foods in ways
that aren't even painful to us right
there's so much we can do as so much we
can do to be like Japan I mean it was a
bit weird in Japan though because there
were things they did that we can't do
right so I'll give you an example this
was one of the weirdest days in the
research for the book in 2008 obesity
very slightly went up in Japan it was
still like laughably low and they had a
real panic and they introduced this new
law it's called the Metabo law um it's
named after metabolic syndrome which is
a really nasty combination of like
diabetes obesity and other problems you
can get when you're when you're very
overweight and um the law is very simple
every single company in Japan on a
particular day every year has to weigh
every single person who works there and
if their weight has gone up they have to
drop a plan with their employer to bring
their weight down and as a company
overall if your weight goes up you can
be fined by the government and I was
like how could this possibly work so I
went to a company that does it tanita
they all do it but a company that let me
go and see how it
works and it's really weird right you at
this workplace you arrive you show your
face to a video screen it says hi
Stephen you walked 14,000 steps
yesterday you're number 121 in the
company in terms of steps taken cuz
everyone has to wear like a Fitbit well
equivalent to a Fitbit everyone uploads
pictures of every meal they have to this
system where you can see it it was
bizarre right um and yeah explain to
Japanese people who kept going you know
every morning in this office when we'd
all be having donuts and coffee they do
aerobics together it was bizarre and I
sort of explain to these Japanese people
right if you tried to do this in Britain
we would burn the [__] office down
right like and they would just go well
why why they couldn't understand why I
was so affronted by it and that okay
that's a big cultural Chasm and we can't
do that and I wouldn't want us to do
that but if you look at so many of the
other changes in
Japan I started to see like what you win
if you get this right so Japan has the
longest life expectancy in the whole
world and one of the best things I did
for the book One the most moving things
for me is I went to the oldest village
in the whole world it's in okanawa in
the deep south of Japan and there's a
village called ogimi where there's 20 15
households and 190 of them have someone
who's over the age of 90 living there
right so it's the oldest place on Earth
um Japan has the by far the longest life
expectancy in the world and not just
that um you're far less likely to get
sick as you age so they have not just
more life but more healthy life and I
went to their little Community
Center and the first person I met was a
102y old woman called Matsu fukuchi who
was this like almost like Kind of
Perfect crumple of wrinkles right she
was so cheerful chatting to her she was
like I can't stay for long cuz I'm
looking after my son who fell off the
roof the other day fixing it I was like
Jesus how old is your son um and she was
like oh I love you know she was so full
of joy she I love life I spent all of
yesterday watching volleyball with my
grandchildren it's so great she was so
happy she'd walked there on her own and
then there was this moment where they
put on some music she put on this red
kimono and she started dancing and all
these old in these women as old as a
century start dancing right and I danced
with her and I was thinking God this is
this woman was born before radio started
broadcasting in Japan and here I am
recording an interview with her on my
iPhone this is what you get if you get
this right if you sort out the Obesity
crisis you get to have more years of
health and joy and dancing right that's
what we're fighting for here I think
about how many people I know who died
young because of complications related
to obesity everyone listening and
watching will know someone who would be
alive now if we had sorted out the
Obesity crisis but has died everyone
right and it doesn't have to be this way
you know now part of that solution in
the short and medium term is going to be
these drugs in the longer term it
doesn't have to even be that right Japan
is a real country it exists they solved
this problem there are other countries
in the world that are solving these
problems we don't have to tolerate this
being done to our children we don't have
to accept us being made sick and our
children being made sick but it requires
an Awakening around what's really
happening who's doing this to us at the
moment you know whenever I my weight
goes up and down right it has gone up
and down throughout my life and whenever
I was fatter I would blame myself right
I wasn't angry with the forces that have
done this to us right
more three-year-old children know what
the McDonald's m means than know their
own last name right I didn't choose that
world I didn't choose to live in a world
where we were you know constantly
promoted and fattened and physically
changed such that it's hard to come back
right that don't mean I had no
responsibility in that I did but we
don't have to continue like this do you
think you could stay at the we you are
now without this as EK it's funny you
holding this I feel like we're in a
weird dystopian version of QVC right um
do I think uh honestly well if I'm
typical we know from the clinical trials
70% of people regain the weight within a
year no I don't think so if I'm being
really honest with myself I don't think
so I think I have made lots of changes
in my life that mean I don't think I
would go back to quite where I was but I
think I would very rapidly regain a lot
of weight so you have to take this for
life now to stay the way you're at
therefore yeah and there's a big debate
about we mentioned before with the
amphetamin based um diet drugs from the
past that people develop tolerance one
of the big question marks around this is
do people develop tolerance does it mean
that over time it will have less of an
effect right now some scientists the
scientists asked about this just were
wildly all over the place some said no
we do know diabetics don't seem to
develop tolerance they because if they
did they would need higher and higher
doses to get the same level of control
for their blood sugar so that's a point
against tolerance but others said
it would seem quite likely we developed
tolerance we developed tolerance for
most drugs it would be surprising if we
didn't probably what's most likely again
Carell luro the South African
psychiatrist said to
me again probably the best comparison is
bariatric surgery you have bariatric
surgery you lose an absolute [__] ton of
weight and then you regain a little bit
of it over the next few years and then
you sort of plateau at that higher point
but we don't know the truth is no one
knows I'm also concerned that if you is
there a world where if you stopped
taking this your body had become reliant
on your gp1 coming from this so your
body makes less glp1 itself don't think
it's so much I don't think that's the
concern I think but there is I think
you've gone to a really important point
we know all forms of diet slow down your
metabolism right that's a reality about
diet um which is why often people end up
fatter at the end than they were at the
start um I'm worried about and again I
asked lots of scientists and people just
said we don't know
I'm worried about
um is my metabolism slowing down as I
take this drug if I let's say they
discovered some terrible problem with it
and it had to be withdrawn would I then
have a slower metabolism and be fatter
than I was at the start yeah no one
knows that's a significant risk and the
other big sort of risk here is you've
talked about a few times is this eating
disorder um epidemic it seems I think
you talk about in your book that since
March 2020 rates of anorexia and bmia
were 42% higher than they would be
expected for teenage girls aged 13 to 16
I think that's cuz of lockdown to be
fair that's not that's not a result of
the drugs that's because of the massive
stress of lockdown yeah some research in
the lon journal and 32% higher for those
aged 17 to 19 what I'm saying here is
that we we do have an issue with eating
disorders in in the Western World
especially um they they skyrocketed
after the the pandemic but when I think
about eating disorders and bulimia and
anorexia and I think about this and and
what it might mean for those Eating
Disorders I feel somewhat concerned
especially when kids get their hands on
them go beyond concerned and we don't
have to speculate about this we've been
here before so in the early '90s there
was a very popular amphetamin based diet
drug that was marketed in the United
States and it was huge and lots of
teenage girls used it and it led to a
catastrophe there was a guy called Rob
weyden who was a congressman for Ohio at
the time who held Congressional hearings
on this and they are really chilling to
read because they show what happens when
a popular diet drug combines with eating
disordered young women right so there
was a a woman called Jessica McDonald
who testified at the hearing she was um
she was in her early 20s at the time so
she was a ballet dancer obviously we
know about the horrendous pressures on
body shape for ballet dancers and she
would take this drug like this
amphetamin based drug until she passed
out to be thin she would take it to
starve herself because she wanted to be
that that ballet shap there's a guy
called Tony Smith from state center in
Iowa who testifies that his daughter
Noel from when she was very young became
obsessed with the idea that she was fat
she would go and look at these fashion
magazines and say daddy do you think I'm
fat why don't I look like these
women and she got hold of these diet
drugs massively starved herself and died
of a heart attack and he read out this
heartbreaking poem where she describes
like you know I'm
hungry I want to eat but not yet not yet
right so we know that when a diet drug
combines with eating disorders it leads
to catastrophic outcomes we don't have
to speculate so yeah that's one of my
three or four biggest concerns now like
I say we can introduce regulation now to
mean you only get it from a doctor the
doctor has to see you that will cut some
of that but I don't see how and and
that's really important and anyone we
save is worth saving but yeah I'm very
very concerned about that I'm also
concerned about a more subtle effect in
relation to that so the worst moment I
had in writing the book was not any of
the physical side effects for me
although there were some Grim moments
there early on it was a moment when um
so M I've got a niece called Erin and
she's 18 now although she's 19 actually
but in my head she's sort of six years
old all the time like CU she's the baby
of my family she's the only girl she was
the youngest so no one makes me more
protective and one day a few months into
taking these drugs I was FaceTiming with
her she was in a pub in
Liverpool and she was like oh Yan you've
lost so much weight and I was like
preining she's like oh look I can see
your drawer I never knew you had a
drawer and I was like oh yeah I was
looking you're happy and
then she looked down and she
said will you get me some oamic she's a
perfectly healthy weight she always has
been and I thought what the [__] am I
doing all her life I've been trying to
give her this
message don't be judged by how you look
don't worry about that you know and I
thought I've
counteracted everything I wanted to
communicate
and we know and and she decided not to
take it and all and ended fine with her
but when I was a kid there were no fat
people on television except as the butt
of the joke and I think about my niece
she's grown up seeing actually quite a
lot of women who have a broader range of
body shapes in the public eye and in the
last two years almost all of those women
have massively shrunk now they're not
talking about a zic but unless there's
been some kind of outbreak of dentry in
Malibu I think we know what's happening
right some of them are talking about it
but most are not can I just ask on that
cuz we've seen a lot of very famous
faces suddenly shrink over the last
couple of years and when you read their
autobiographies they talk about like
going to the gym and eating getting
their lifestyle right do you think
they're lying I mean
obviously yes it does appear I wasn't
sure if it was just me but I look I look
think about a lot of people that were a
little bit bigger and it seems that
suddenly everybody's kind of
cracked weight loss and it's rapid and
it's super fast I don't want to name any
particular names cuz it's not my place
to talk about individuals like that but
it really does seem like Hollywood has
found a p a great personal trainer and
I'm I'm just like I'm wondering if um if
this is what it is yes although I think
I would say the people you and I think
about are almost all women and I do
think we should be I know you would
agree with this I'm not making this as a
point against you women get so much more
[__] than men men for this sort of thing
right like actually one of my editors
said to me you know I was saying why has
no one else written a book about OIC yet
why am I the only one and they said cuz
only a man could write this because a
woman would be crucified for writing it
right she would be monstered and if you
look whenever even someone as
unbelievably popular and amazing as
Oprah slightly C is my friend um gets
Savaged for it right and there's lots of
deep underlying reasons for that that
came out for me as well actually that I
I I projected towards myself I remember
for a long time taking the
drug I felt like I I mentioned this a
little bit before but I felt like I was
cheating I felt like I was sinning
almost and I started to look at the kind
of deep ideas they're so deep in our
kind of collective unconscious if you
look at so for example in the 6th
Century the pope Pope Gregory the first
draws up the seven deadly sins right and
one of them is gluttony and it's this
image it's always depicted with an image
of some hugely fat person looking like a
pig you know and it's
horrible it's very deep in our culture
the idea that being obese is a sin right
if you look at the forms of weight loss
we admire they follow the pattern of sin
right the kind of classic Catholic
pattern of sin you sin then you have to
suffer and redeem yourself and then we
forgive you right so if you look at the
forms of weight loss we admire there're
ones where people are humiliated and
suffer terribly you starve yourself you
um you know you think about that show
The Biggest Loser which I hate uh you
know where severely obese people are
made to sort of compete and gring
horrific forms of exercise then we're
like okay Jabba we forgive you now you
know what I mean we use this kind of
stigmatizing ways of
thinking cheating is a bit more
subtle because I kept thinking I'm
cheating as I do this and I was like
well that's really weird if I if I had a
heart problem and I took statins I would
not think I was cheating right I said
why is that and I think it's partly so
people put in a huge amount of effort to
be thin right loads of women watching
this and it's disproportionately women
will suffer some privation and
deprivation in their life because they
are really trying to be thin and then
they hear a this [__] just injects
himself once a week and he gets to be
thin like me it's like they feel the way
I imagine cyclists do when they look at
Lance Armstrong right and the only way
out of those that negative conversation
where we turn on each other like rats in
a sack is to realize
oh there is a sin and there are people
who are cheating but it's not Oprah it's
not someone who Jeff Parker that guy I
mentioned who you know didn't want to
die young it's the food industry that
[__] all of us that's why we're in
that race right that's why you're
starving yourself that's why we feel
we're
Sinners okay well we can collectively
come together and challenge that shared
opponent if we want but if we're just
going to get into look it's very hard in
this age of social media Madness to not
have every conversation turn into a
toxic conversation and it's not
surprising that something is charged as
a debate about a zenic and weight has
become so toxic so quickly but again we
don't have to do that that the toxicity
isn't going to get us out of this right
we're in a shared crisis everyone
watching has someone they love who is on
course to Die Young because of the
problems associated with obesity because
obesity is so widespread in this Society
in a very recent amount of time look at
a picture of a beach in Britain
in 1975 not a million years ago everyone
is thin by our standards right this
happened in the blink of an eye in human
terms right again we don't have to
tolerate that part of it is also we
don't like when people lose weight some
of us because it shines the light on us
and I think about someone like Adele who
dropped a ton of weight very quickly and
the shocking thing when she when she
dropped that photo I think it was at
like a birthday party because she went
from like being you know a certain way
to then dropping weight very quickly so
we because we don't see Adele's private
life life much it was just this the
selfie she dropped and if you look
online at the reaction people were
betrayed they felt betrayed by Adele's
weight loss not because they're they're
assuming she used a zenic or anything
the fact she's now
not the way she was in terms of her
weight people were like almost angry
about it and the same happened with
Rebel Wilson When Rebel Wilson dropped a
ton of weight because in her book she
talks about you know she wanted to
increase her chance of having a kid so
her doctor advised her to lose lose the
we people were Ang like almost angry
that they lost someone they could maybe
relate to or that made them feel a
certain way about themselves which I
find to be really interesting that we
actually don't like it when
someone loses way we've got to
understand where that's coming from
obviously I don't support anyone being
cruel to people online and it's good for
both ad Del and Rebel Wilson that
they've improved their
health um but I think where it comes
from and a lot of these things that can
seem a little bit odd that that are kind
of said we've got to realize how much
shame people are soaking up on this
issue you know if you have a BMI higher
than 35 and you're a woman 45% of women
in that position get insulted every
single day in public every day right so
you're walking through the world
constantly being made to feel there's
something wrong with you being treated
like [__] um and I can see how people in
that position develop a sort of
parasocial relationship with Rebel
Wilson or Adele like oh look we can look
to Adele and they feel trapped they feel
they can't lose weight and then they see
Adele and Rebel Wilson and they're just
like oh two brute [__] you you know I
get it now it's not the right response I
would want to talk to them more about
okay what we want to think deeper about
this but I can see where it comes from
and I can see why some people look at me
and go you [__] right I totally get it
I suspect I would have felt that anger
were I not me looking at me right so I
get where the anger this comes from from
the moment we're born in this culture we
are primed to be overweight and we are
primed to feel tremendous amounts of
Shame about being overweight right and
anything that comes along and brings up
those stories and forces us to think to
them brings them to the surface like
these new weight loss
drugs just leeches out of all of us so
many negative and angry and hurt
feelings and I felt it myself
right I felt so much self-doubt all the
way through this I still feel self-doubt
about it I still have days where I
wonder am I doing completely the wrong
thing so I do think we have to
understand where it's coming from and
not just sort of know you're not doing
this you're always interested in
understanding where people come from but
it's tempting to just condemn people and
go look at this bad behavior and I'm
always more interested when people are
behaving badly and it is cruel to say to
Adele you [__] you betrayed us uh I
mean I would never say anything about to
Adell anyway because I love Adell but I
saw her in Vegas she's incredible but
um I do think we always have to try to
understand and it comes from a place of
profound pain and that's not a pain that
those people deserved right that and
that's a pain they should never have
been subjected to but one of the really
surprising things you talk about in your
book is the relationship that a zek has
on addiction and I couldn't quite figure
out why there'd be any impact on
addiction if we start taking AE drugs
you talk about the how it eases the food
chatter in our brains and the sort of
food cravings we have but then there's a
lot of research you go into that shows
um a zenek and these kinds of drugs can
actually have an impact on our um
addiction to things like cocaine and
alcohol so this is much disputed and
there are serious scientists on both
sides but I found it mindblowing and
totally fascinating so for
example woman called Elizabeth yog who's
a professor at the University of
gothenberg in Sweden has done some of
the pioneering work on this I
interviewed her a
lot they get a loot of rats and they put
them in a cage and they give them loads
of alcohol and rats will like alcohol
and they get hammered like the rest of
us and they wobble about and they love
it right so they put them in this cage
for a while they've got plenty of
alcohol they get drunk over many weeks
and then once it starts to resemble like
a dive bar in vas they do an
intervention they come along and they
inject them with gp1 Agonist the exact
drug you've got in front of you stide um
and then they watch and what they
discovered what professor yog and her
colleagues discovered is afterwards the
rats drink about 60% less than they did
before and the Rats who drank most
heavily are the ones who cut back on
their drinking the most like whoa what's
going on there but then they thought
okay maybe it's because alcohol's got a
caloric content it's like they want the
calories less right so then there were
experiments done with drugs that don't
contain any calories so Professor
Patricia grigson who's at Penn State
University gets rats heavily using
heroin and fenil gives them a GP Agonist
again finds the same thing 50% reduction
ction in the rats using the her self
administering the the heroin and the
fenil Then Greg stanard who I mentioned
before who's at Florida State University
does it with cocaine in it was mice not
rats for him again 50% reduction in them
using cocaine we don't know why again it
come some of the theories come back to
that question about the reward system
could it be dampening the reward system
one of the things a lot of the
scientists find fascinating is these
drugs appear to have what they call SEL
activity so SEL activity is where
the drug makes you want less of the Big
Mac but not less of a salad right so it
seems to it doesn't just generally
dampen you don't just not eat at all
some people do with malnutrition as a
risk but most people don't right so
given that it's some of them argue again
it's highly speculative at this point it
seems to be activating downgrading your
desire for things that are bad for you
but not things that are good for you
right I'm thinking how can that be that
seems so weird let's I'm Elton John
right and I get my pleasure from playing
music how can it know to tell me to eat
fewer Jam sandwiches but not to engage
in jamming right how can it do that and
they kept saying we don't know there
does seem to be a mechanism that does
that we're trying to explore it so
obviously hugely encouraging results in
animal studies with uh addiction so now
there's lots of experiments going on
with giving these drugs to humans to see
if they reduce addiction there there's
been a huge amount of anecdotal evidence
interview to a nurse in Canada called
Tracy who had a bad relationship breakup
and just became completely addicted to
shopping she would just obsessively buy
books she'd never read clothes she'd
never wear she was doing a lot of um
skin
picking um and obsessive eating she goes
on as mpic and all these addictions like
disappeared so there's now this debate
okay is it going to have this effect
more widely the early research is kind
of mixed so there's only very very small
studies on humans so far uh it found
that it reduce smoking but only if you
pair it with a nicotine patch they found
that it does reduce alcohol consumption
but only if you were a heavy drinker at
the start so we're going to know a lot
more we're going to get a lot of results
actually this year and definitely a lot
next year but it's a very promising so
some people argue so the most extreme I
want to stress this is
speculative the biggest cheerleaders for
the drug would say actually we haven't
found a drug that causes appetite
regulation what we found is a drug that
boosts self-control across the board
right now that's very contested I'm
always conscious you know of the
overselling of drugs
generally we want to be careful about it
but it's a possible scenario and the
animal research is mind-blowing and
really is highly highly exciting and you
don't normally see this right there's no
other drug that I'm aware of pretty sure
there isn't um that just reduces
addiction across the board in animal
studies right it's remarkable I mean
there's a debate about whether you can
even call it Addiction in animals but
you know what I mean heavy compulsive
use what impact has zek had on your
weight loss Journey how much have you
lost I me I just lost a huge amount of
weight so I lost three stone across a
year and actually it was even more
dramatic was the percentage of body fat
that I lost so at the start I was 33%
body fat I remember the day Josh my
trainer measured that and it sort of
looked winced as he saw it and um I said
oh God if you if I was a sandwich you
wouldn't want to eat me I later looked
up whales at only 35% body fat so it
started disconcerting so I went from 33%
body fat to 22% body fat so it's a
really dramatic fall and did you
increase your dose yeah so everyone
starts at 0.25 milligram partly because
the most common side effect by far is
nausea right almost everyone feels
nauseous a bit when they start taking it
for some people the nausea is unbearable
I interviewed someone called Sunny
Newton in Vermont who said you know it
felt like an alien had entered her body
and was thrashing and trying to get out
yeah a significant minority experienced
such extreme nausea they just have to
stop for me the nausea has now totally
gone away way um and Carell laru one of
the scientists who worked on there said
look when it comes to nausea you've got
a level with people there are two kinds
of drugs there are drugs that have side
effects and there are drugs that don't
work right and he's right about that but
yeah the nausey is pretty bad but but
for me it's all gone away now I really
do admire Oprah I've um watched her
she's kind of like a role model of mine
for how she's kind of conducted herself
throughout her career and as you say
she's a friend of yours and she's I
think recently come out and admitted to
using as zc she's talked about how she
struggled with with weight for her life
um andna zek has been a bit of a Magic
Bullet it seems for her in her weight
loss Journey um you know her as a person
I've not been paying enough attention to
her describing her decision to know why
she decided to take a zek verses I don't
know some other form of dieting has she
explained that yeah she talks about it
very movingly um she talked about an
interview with People magazine and then
a brilliant special for ABC I think
um I mean nobody has publicly tortured
themselves with diets more than Oprah
there's this famous clip that you've
probably seen where she comes on stage
on her show and she's Wheeling a a huge
bucket of fat and that's the amount of
fat she'd lost on this diet and she
describes very movingly in this special
she says it much better than I can how
she had starved herself to get that
right and you think about so she had
tried all the
extreme diet and exercise options that
were available and they'd always yyo
back for the reasons that we talked
about
before so and you know and she had to
have a knee operation I'm not giving
away anything she's she's disclosed this
you she had to have a knee operation and
she was very worried about her
health and so for those reasons she's
made this this Choice there are lots of
reasons to be worried about these drugs
but I have found it very
hard when you talk to people who really
struggled with this like that guy Jeff
Parker I mentioned before in San
Francisco like Oprah people who've made
the decision to do it and seen the
benefits of the weight loss staggering
benefits whatever the other arguments
are I've NE I don't want to argue
against them right if if you are taking
these drugs and experiencing an enormous
Improvement in your in your health as
they both have and as lots of other
people have then that's been the right
choice for you now that won't be right
for everyone I met people who really
regretted taking the drugs for all sorts
of reasons including many of the
terrible side effects and
risks but I think we have to be truthful
to the complexity of these drugs right I
mean one of the reasons it's called
Magic pill the book is because there's
three different ways you could think
about this as magic loads of people who
take the drug go this is Magic right so
the first form of magic is obvious it
seems to solve a problem so quickly so
effectively that you're like whoa It's
like a miracle right that's one way the
second way is it could be magic like a
conjures illusion right it could be like
a magic trick it seems to solve the
problem but doesn't or sets up and
trains something else or the Third Way
is think about almost every fable about
magic is you get what you want but then
you get what you want in a way you
didn't quite expect you you make a wish
with the genie and you get what you want
but the wish doesn't quite work out how
you thought most famous story about
magic is Fantasia you know the magic can
spiral away from you so I think one of
the things we're still trying to figure
out is what kind of magic is this is it
a magic solution is it a magic trick or
is it a magic solution that's going to
spiral in all sorts of unpredictable
directions I have to say when you know
when you were holding that pen looking
at me I got weird like you were doing
slightly judgmental Dragon's Den eyes
and I was like I was like [__] how do I
persuade him to invest in me right so
funny I I was you I was thinking I was
thinking I was having a conversation
with myself and I staring at thinking
God this would be easier than going
because after you leave here I I haven't
eaten yet today I'm going to have my
lunch and then I'm going to go to the
gym for about an hour and a half and
much of the reason why I go to the gym
is to try and stay in shape you know I
want to keep my I want to keep my belly
fat off I want to keep my muscles strong
I want to be strong I want to look good
that's the that's the reasons I go to
the gym also the positive consequence of
me going to the gym later on after this
conversation is it will make my brain
feel really good yeah now as I was
looking down at the pen I was
thinking I could take this and then the
belly fat you know would wouldn't be
there but then I would lose the positive
upside of the exercise that I'm going to
get from going to the gym as well so I
was wondering to myself are people going
to exercise less and is there a
consequence to us not ex not exercising
as much um to our mental health and our
feelings of you know happiness and all
the things that exercise does for us
yeah the answer to both your questions
is yes people will exercise less and it
will have negative effects so we know I
want to add to that the point that I
alluded to earlier on people are getting
more and more sedentary we're living in
like a Vision Pro headset don't need to
move World well you know what I mean so
we're going to be able to inject to keep
the weight down but we're we're still
going to be moving less and there's a
lot of upside to moving and exercise
yeah so we know that there's there are
enormous benefits to exercise which
exist quite separate to the question of
weight loss right if you exercise for
270 hours a year you add three years
onto your life even if it doesn't cause
weight loss right so that benefits in
terms of preventing disease slowing down
aging mental health are just enormous
from exercise and I think you've gone to
a really important drawback which is
yeah if you can get the benefit in the
short ter medium-term just from a
jab but that calculation you were
thinking through as you were holding the
pen in the slightly Sinister Dragon Den
way um is a calculation lots of people
were going to make and there's um
there's a lot of things I'm not sure
about in these drugs but there's a few
bits of advice which I am very sure
about if you are not overweight or obese
you definitely shouldn't take these
drugs right you are incurring all the
risks for none of the benefits so that
I'm certain of and there are lots of
people who are not overweight or obese
who are taking the drugs to be super
thin my friend Elise lonen who used to
be the chief content officer at goop
said she won't even go out for dinner in
LA with people we know now because no
one eats anything like why did we come
out for dinner you're all starving she
says you know dieting is out elimination
is in the way she put it so I'm
confident about that I'm also fairly
confident although slightly less but
fairly confident if your BMI is higher
than
35 or your body fat percentage is very
very
high and you're not someone with thyroid
cancer in your family and you're not
trying to get
pregnant I would recommend taking the
drugs I think for you the balance of
risk and and assuming you've tried diet
and it didn't work I think for you the
balance of risk is is more towards the
benefits of taking the drug I'm not as
confident about that but I'm pretty the
people I love who have BMI higher than
35 who are in that position I have
recommended the drug to them for people
between with a BMI between 27 and 35 I
think it's much more or um you've got to
just go down the list of the benefits
and drawbacks um and really think it
through for yourself and reasonable
people will reach completely different
conclusions it's going to be quite
interesting to see that people who do
decide to do exercise and they change
their diet and they've start running
marathons when they lose weight every
everybody is going to say no you didn't
that's so funny everyone's going to say
it was impc if some celebrity now drops
I don't know three stone or four stone
and they did it you know in the gym and
with a diet change no one is going to
believe them no one that's very funny
and I think think certainly yeah I think
you're right there I had thought of that
you wouldn't believe them of course you
wouldn't believe them no you're right
one of the big rebuttal that I see
online is that because people are now
taking these drugs people like you are
taking them to lose weight diabetics
can't get their hands on these drugs
anymore and I saw some articles that
said the um the drugs have been in such
high demand that diabetics who really
really need them to save their lives now
can't get access to them I think those
people have a really good point and I
interviewed some of them for the book
and it was a very painful conversation I
think the solution is what we should
have done right from the start and what
we should do now is what we did in
Britain with the covid vacine so we
should um ration the drug and the people
with the greatest need should be given
it first and everyone
agrees severely obese people and
diabetics together would be the people
who most need the drug and they should
be given it first people like me who've
got heart disease in my family but were
not hugely obese would probably be
around the middle and you know people
who don't have heart disease and are
just sort of overweight would be at the
bottom we didn't have that system what
we had unfortunately because the
government didn't set up that system was
a scramble which meant that you know
some diabetics didn't get the drug they
needed had to go on insulin earlier
which poses a real threat to their
health that's awful and I feel a bit
ashamed about it because of course if
people like me hadn't hadn't all
together bought it that wouldn't have
happened in practice for me
personally I was worried about my own
heart risk you know I mean year older
than my granddad was when he died um but
that's not much of an excuse and when I
met the diabetics in that position like
for example a guy called zami Jalil who
was exactly in that position he could as
a musician 41 couldn't get the the ASM
pick he needed for his diabetes for his
type two
diabetes I felt um ashamed you know
clearly his need was
greater Yan thank you thank you for a
few things I think it's worth saying
that the first time you came on my
podcast I had basically no listeners you
were like a tiny little baby podcaster I
remember it really clearly you came to
my flat I showed up at your flat in
London I'd read your book lost
connections I was so fascinated by it so
I reached out to you and asked you if
you'd come on and you said yes when I
was when no one was listening to the
podcast I don't I wasn't even videoing
it back then um and it was an incredible
conversation the audio was terrible
there was Lo we had loads of issues and
stuff like that but you were one of the
first people to really give me a chance
so it's so wonderful that that we can
still stay in touch and that I get to
cover your work still to this day so
thank you for giving me a chance back in
the day I really appreciate it oh my
pleasure and thank you for writing this
book because one of the the most sort of
popular things that our audience have
been seeking to understand is a zmek
we've seen that in all the data and the
way that you approach this even though
you are someone that's taking it so it's
easy to see how you would be biased in
various ways to defend it or whatever
that's not the approach you take and in
the book magic pill you're able to be
incredibly nuanced and how you look at
the pros and the cons in a way that I
was not expecting from someone who is
taking it themselves and I think that's
really important because you're right
you finished the book and in a weird way
you you have more information but I can
understand how the decision Still
Remains with the individual and I think
that's really what any book on this
subject should should aim to achieve it
should kind of not have a dog in the
fight but present you both sides of the
trade-off so that you can make a
decision for yourself and that's what
you do so skillfully and the real thing
you know as an author that you've taught
me over the years is you're just
remarkably good at writing and it's
really your your storytelling is
phenomenal it's influenced me profoundly
as an author myself and uh whenever I
read a book now I often wish that they
had written it like one of your books
because you take a you take a concept
that's difficult and widely discussed
and you take us on a journey and that
journey is so much more enjoyable than
just reading like a science book so I
recommend everybody to go and get magic
pill right now it's um it's obviously a
huge point of conversation at the moment
these these magic pills um and this is
the book to read on it magic pill the
extraordinary benefits and disturbing
risks of the new weight loss drugs it's
due to be released on the 2nd of May
2024 so we're a couple of days away from
that now and um yeah I would just highly
highly recommend this book thank you so
much Johan oh I'm really touched by that
Stephen thank you so much I almost
forgot we have a tradition on this
podcast oh yes the question what is the
question who who posed this question I'm
not going to tell you who who this is
but the question that's been left for
you is it's a really interesting one
why
should
Humanity continue to exist so as you
know I've been writing for God 12 years
now 13 years a book about a series of
crimes that have been happening in Las
Vegas I'm not allowed to talk about but
it will come out next year and I promise
we'll finally talk about it I think
you're just saying this so you can hang
out in Vegas every time I see you say
You're Just in Vegas writing a book I'm
like where's the book your hand yeah
there are people many people in Vegas
have said to me yeah your book's been a
long time [__] coming but so um I
know two people called Rob banghart and
Paul
Vino who um a lot of people won't know
but there's many thousands of homeless
people who live in the drainage tunnels
beneath Las
Vegas and Rob and Paul used to live in
the
tunnels and Rob lived in a particular
set of tunnels that I know very well and
have spent a lot of time
in and in
2017 so Rob was known as hobo Santa he
would steal things and give them to
people and um he was also a kind of
low-level dealer very low-level and
there was a a group of uh rival Cuban
dealers who didn't like him and one day
in
2017 they hit him in the head with an
axe split his skull open dragged him
onto the railway tracks and left him
there for a train to run him over but
fortunately someone spotted him pulled
him off the tracks and he survived and
he in the next six months as he
recovered he um turned his life around
and he began to volunt here for a group
that my friend Paul runs uh called shine
a light which is a group of people
overwhelmingly people who used to live
in the tunnels who managed to get out
turn their lives around who now help the
people who are still down there they
give them loads of practical things from
tampons to flashlights and they most
importantly give them support when they
want to leave and I've got lots of
people out and every month get people
out of the tunnels and I've seen them do
it with some people I really love who
were down
there and one
day few years ago I was I was with Rob
and
um
um so one day a few years ago I was with
Rob when he got word that uh a friend of
his from the tunnels called picket had
died he' ODed in in the tunnel they used
to live in so we went straight down
there and um picket stuff was still
there they'd taken away his
body and we bumped into a woman who also
lives down there and whenever Rob goes
to the tunnels even in a situation like
that he always BRS supplies you know
food and stuff and he said to
her who's in the tunnel over there and
she said oh you don't want to go there
and he said why and she named some
people and he said no I'll go there I'll
give them some stuff and he went and
gave them some stuff anyway I didn't
really think about it very much I was
thinking about pick it and what
happened and a few days later I said to
Rob what did she mean when she said you
don't want to go there and he said oh
it's just these guys and I said what
guys he said oh well they're the guys
who hit me in the head with an axe
they're the guys who tried to kill me
and I saidwell why did you go and help
them and he said because they're human
beings and they're suffering and they
need
help and
um I thought a lot about
Rob every day him and
Paul go back into those tunnels you know
they could do anything they could leave
and do a million things right they're
incredibly intelligent and talented
people every day they go back and they
help the people who got left behind and
they make no money doing it and they
don't have great lives doing it in any
material sense and I've say to them why
do you do it and they just they say
because it's the right thing to
do and if you said to me why should
human beings continue to exist I could
give you a load of abstract answers I
could talk to you about philosophy and I
could talk to you about art and I just
say come and meet Rob and
Paul there why humans should continue to
exist
thank you cheers Stephen
[Music]